# Ch 24: EM

## Electromagnetic Waves

### Introduction

How would you describe light?

Q1. Why do different types of light \(e.g. x-ray, ultraviolet, visible, infrared, etc.\) have different effects?

Q2. How does light differ from other waves \(i.e. sound waves, water waves, waves on a rope, earthquake waves, etc.\)

Discovering a New Phenomenon

There is a pattern in the advance of scientific knowledge: 1\) observation 2\) hypothesis 3\) controlled experiment. In the early 1800's physicists observed electric and magnetic effects and came to the conclusion that there is an interaction between electricity and magnetism. Current creates magnetic field and a magnetic field can be used to create current. In the 1860's Maxwell modified Ampere's Law and then used four equations to form the hypothesis that there was an electromagnetic wave \(oscillating electric and magnetic fields\). This hypothesis predicted a speed for the wave of around 3 x 108 m/s. around 1850 the speed of light had been measured to be around 3 x 108 m/s. Experiments after 1870 confirmed that light is an electromagnetic wave that contains oscillating electric and magnetic fields.

#### Topics

* Electromagnetic Waves
* Categories of EM Waves

#### Terms to Know

* electromagnetic wave, wavelength, frequency, spectrum, energy, gamma, x-ray, UV, visible, infrared, microwave, radio
* electromagnetic wave, wavelength, frequency, spectrum, energy, intensity, power

**Introduction to Electromagnetic Waves**

### 24.1 Maxwell's Equations: Electromagnetic Waves Predicted and Observed

#### To Do

* Restate Maxwell's equations with understanding of the concept for each equation.

#### Notes

You should read through the description of the equations in our textbook.

Another description of the equations is:

1. Gauss's Law for Electricity    The sum of the electric flux through a closed surface is equal to the net charge inside that surface divided by the electric constant ε0 .

Concept: There are separate + and – charges.

Σ \(E dA cosθ \) = qinside / ε0

1. Gauss's Law for Magnetism    The sum of the magnetic flux through a closed surface is 0. This summarizes the fact that no magnetic monopoles have been observed.

Concept: There are no isolated magnetic poles.

Σ \(B dA cosθ \) = 0

1. Ampere's Law   The sum of the magnetic field times the path length around a closed loop is equal to the net current that penetrates the loop PLUS the rate of change of the electric flux through the loop. The second term was added to Ampere's Law by Maxwell.

Concept: Current or a changing electric flux creates magnetic field.

Σ \(B dL cosθ \) = μ0 I + μ0 ε0 ΔΦElectric field/Δt

1. Faraday's Law  The sum of the electric field times the path length around a closed loop is equal to the rate of change of the magnetic flux through the loop.

Concept: A changing value of the magnetic flux creates electric field \(and thus EMF in a wire\).

Σ \(E dL cosθ \) = - N ΔΦMagnetic field/Δt

Maxwell was an excellent mathematician. When he combined the four equations he found that they predicted the existence of a wave that traveled with a speed of v = 1 / sqrt\(μ0 ε0 \). You should calculate this value before class.

Hertz's Observations

Summarize how Hertz verified the existence of EM waves.

The interference observation confirmed that the electromagnetic radiation was a wave.

The relationship between wave velocity, frequency and wavelength is

v = f λ or c = f λ where c represents the speed of light.

Q3. What is the wavelength of an EM wave that has a frequency of 1040 kHz?

The speed of the EM wave is the same for all frequencies. Describe what happens to the wavelength as the frequency increases.

### 24.2 Production of Electromagnetic Waves

#### To Do

* Describe the electric and magnetic waves as they move out from a source, such as an AC generator.
* Explain the mathematical relationship between the magnetic field strength and the electrical field strength.
* Calculate the maximum strength of the magnetic field in an electromagnetic wave, given the maximum electric field strength.

#### Notes

What questions do you have on the production of the Electric field and magnetic field by the varying current in the wire. \(Figure 24.5 and 24.6\)?

Classical Physics predicts that an accelerated charge will produce an EM wave.

Why is an EM wave labeled a transverse wave?

The discussion in the text describes what happens for E and B near a wire carrying a variable current. How does the EM wave continue to propagate when it is far from the wire? \(i.e. How can light travel through the vacuum of space from the Sun to the Earth?\)

Receiving Electromagnetic Waves

You should read about the effects of the length and shape of the antenna on the ability to receive EM waves that have different wavelengths.

You should know that the incoming EM wave causes electrons to move in the antenna. The equipment in the receiver detects the motion of the electrons and converts this signal to some useful form \(audio, video, 1's and 0's, etc.\)

Relating _E_ -Field and _B_ -Field Strengths

Analysis of Maxwell's EM wave shows that there is a relationship between the E and B fields.

E/B = c or B = E/c The magnetic field value will be smaller than the E field value for the wave.

### 24.3 The Electromagnetic Spectrum

#### To Do

* List three "rules of thumb" that apply to the different frequencies along the electromagnetic spectrum.
* Explain why the higher the frequency, the shorter the wavelength of an electromagnetic wave.
* Draw a simplified electromagnetic spectrum, indicating the relative positions, frequencies, and spacing of the different types of radiation bands.
* List and explain the different methods by which electromagnetic waves are produced across the spectrum.
* . Describe a property, use, or danger for each portion of the EM spectrum

#### Notes

You should study the table 24.1. Gamma rays are the most energetic form of light. Radio waves are the least energetic form of light. The parts of the spectrum are listed in order of increasing energy. Memorize this order.

You should know the EM Spectrum rules of thumb.

Transmission, Reflection, and Absorption

Different materials interact with EM waves differently depending on the frequency of the EM wave.

What portions of the EM spectrum can easily pass through the Earth's atmosphere?

Radio and TV Waves

You should read about the differences between AM radio and FM radio.

How many radio stations do you think it is possible to listen to in our classroom?

Why don't we here all of these stations at the same time when a radio is turned on?

You should know that the radio can listen to one station at a time due to resonance in the radio at one frequency allowing the signal from the antenna for that frequency to be amplified while blocking the other signals.

Our textbook is a little out of date concerning TV. The TV signals in the USA are now digital. The use of digital allows more information to be transmitted in a smaller range of frequencies. This will allow for more channels. There is competition for the use of the EM spectrum and no one is making more EM spectrum!

Radio Wave Interference

You should read this material.

Microwaves

Q4. Why do microwaves carry more information than radio waves?

How does the radar unit determine the distance to an object that is reflecting the radar waves?

Heating with Microwaves

A microwave oven uses a frequency for the microwaves that is absorbed well by water. The water molecules move back and forth due to the EM wave. This back and forth motion becomes thermal energy in the food.

Infrared Radiation

TRUE or FALSE Infrared light has a wavelength that is longer than 700 nm.

List two uses of infrared light.

The Earth absorbs about 70% \(not 50%\) of the sunlight that hits our upper atmosphere. It is true that there is a beneficial greenhouse effect that raises the average temperature of the Earth by about 40 degrees Celsius.

Visible Light

TRUE or FALSE The visible portion of the EM spectrum is a wide and major portion of the spectrum.

TRUE or FALSE The Earth's atmosphere is nearly transparent to visible light.

Ultraviolet Radiation

What are some adverse effects of UV light on humans?

What protective measures can be used to minimize those effects?

UV Light and the Ozone Layer

How does the ozone layer protect humans from UV light?

Where is there a major hole in the ozone layer?

Benefits of UV Light

Why does your body produce less vitamin D in the winter \(in Nebraska\)?

X-Rays

X-Rays can be produced by causing high speed electrons to decelerate. \(e.g. let the electrons hit a piece of metal\). X-Rays an ionize more atoms than UV light and are thus more dangerous. But they have a positive use in medical imaging. The X-ray images give a diagnosis without the need for surgery. X-rays can be focused on a cancer to deter its growth.

Gamma Rays

Gamma rays are produced in the nuclei of atoms. They are the highest energy and most dangerous EM radiation.

Detecting Electromagnetic Waves from Space

Astronomers can observe in visual and radio wavelengths with equipment on the Earth. Some infrared observations can be made using telescopes on high mountains in dry climates \(water vapor absorbs infrared\). A vast increase in knowledge of the universe has occurred with the placement of gamma ray, x-ray, UV, and infrared telescopes in space.

ANSWERS ……………………..

Q1. Light that has different wavelengths has different energies and interacts with matter in different ways.

Q2. Light does not need a medium to move from the source to the receiver.

Q3. 3 x 108 m/s = 1040 x 103 Hertz \* λ λ = 288 meters or about 946 feet

Q4. Higher frequencies can carry more information than low frequencies. Microwaves have a higher frequency and shorter wavelength than radio waves.

### 24.4 Energy in Electromagnetic Waves

#### To Do

* Explain how the energy and amplitude of an electromagnetic wave are related.
* Given its power output and the heating area, calculate the intensity of a microwave oven's electromagnetic field, as well as its peak electric and magnetic field strengths

#### Notes

Write down how you have experienced the fact that EM waves carry energy.

Q1, What topic from first semester is being described by the statement in the book that transfer of energy is more efficient if the frequency of the EM wave is the same as the natural frequency of the system?

Q2, It is a general property of waves that the energy of the wave is proportional to the square of the amplitude of the wave. Suppose the EM wave "A" carries 1.5 x 10-18 Joules. EM wave "B" has an amplitude three times greater than wave A. Calculate the energy carried by wave B.

The electric and magnetic fields in an EM wave are variable. The average value of the intensity of the EM wave can be calculated using

Iavg = E0 B0 / 2 μ0 where E0 is the maximum value of the electric field and B0 is the maximum value of the magnetic field. In some problems you will need to remember B = E/c .

The peak intensity I0 = 2 Iavg

Intensity = power / area I = P/A

What questions do you have on the examples worked in this chapter?

ANSWERS ……………………..

Q1. Resonance \(e.g. Tacoma Narrows Bridge\)

Q2. You must square the amplitude ratio. 32 = 9 B energy = 9 \* 1.5 x 10-18 = 1.35 x 10-17 J

### Copyright

Copyright© 2015 by Greg Clements. Permission is granted to reproduce this document as long as \(1\) this Copyright notice is included, \(2\) no charge of any kind is made, and \(3\) the use is for an educational purpose. Editing of the document to suit your own class style and purposes is allowed.

