# Ch 09: Rotations-1

## Statics and Torque

### Introduction

#### Topics

* X

#### Terms to Know

* equilibrium, torque, stable, unstable, statics

**/LO/** **9.1. The First Condition for Equilibrium**

* State the first condition of equilibrium.
* Explain static equilibrium.
* Explain dynamic equilibrium.

**/LO/** **9.2. The Second Condition for Equilibrium**

* State the second condition that is necessary to achieve equilibrium.
* Explain torque and the factors on which it depends.
* Describe the role of torque in rotational mechanics.

**9\*\*** /LO/ **\*\*.3. Stability**

* State the types of equilibrium.
* Describe stable and unstable equilibrium.
* Describe neutral equilibrium.

**/LO/** **9.4. Applications of Statics, Including Problem-Solving Strategies**

* Discuss the applications of Statics in real life.
* State and discuss various problem-solving strategies in Statics.

### 9.1 The First Condition for Equilibrium

#### To Do

#### Notes

We have discussed static equilibrium for the case of point objects. In order for the acceleration of an object to be zero the sum of the forces in all three coordinate directions \(X, Y, Z\) must be zero.

First Condition for Equilibrium ΣF

## X

=0 ΣF

## Y

=0 ΣF

## Z

=0

We will restrict our problems to two dimensions, X and Y. To solve these problems you will need to make a good free body diagram, correctly label the forces, and be consistent with the + and – directions.

### 9.2 The Second Condition for Equilibrium

#### To Do

#### Notes

For some problems there will be too many unknowns to solve the problem using just the force equations. The problem will only be solved after write another equation that relates the torques in the situation.

A torque is a force applied at some distance from the rotation axis of an object. e.g. When you push a door open you apply a force at some distance away from the hinges. The door will open \(not equilibrium\) until it is fully open and it strikes an object that creates a torque on the door that matches the torque you are applying.

The symbol for torque is a lower case tau, τ.

Torque = force \* lever arm IF the force and lever arm are perpendicular.

We will use Newtons \* meters \(Nm\) for the units of torque.

In general, torque = force \* lever arm \* sin\(θ\) or τ = rFsin\(θ\)

where θ is the angle between the lever arm and the direction of the force, and r is the length of the lever arm. The lever arm is the distance from the axis of rotation to the point where the force is applied. You are free to place the axis of rotation at any point in the problem to calculate the torque, but I would recommend that you look for the natural location the object pivots around.

I will try to be consistent and use + for torques that tend to make the object rotate in the counterclockwise direction. This means that clockwise torques will be labeled -. It is crucial that you make a sketch and know if the force is creating a + or – torque.

Q1. List two situations for which the torque is zero even though the force applied is not zero. \(Assume only one force is applied to the object.\)

For an extended object to be in equilibrium the sum of the torques = 0.

Second Condition for Equilibrium Στ =0

Q2. TRUE or FALSE If the net force on an object is non-zero the torque on the object will be non-zero.

Q3. TRUE or FALSE If there are two forces acting on an object such that the forces have equal magnitude but opposite directions, the object will be in a state of static equilibrium.

Q4. TRUE or FALSE The center of mass of an object is always someplace inside the physical body of the object.

What questions do you have on equilibrium?

### 9.3 Stability

#### To Do

#### Notes

Q5. What must be true for an object to be in stable equilibrium?

Q6. What is true when an object is in unstable equilibrium?

In order for an object to be in stable equilibrium the center of mass must be inside the base of support for the system. Even though chickens have better stability than humans I am glad I am not a chicken. I accept that I will fall over occasionally.

What questions do you have about stable and unstable equilibrium for the pencil shown in the textbook?

### 9.4 Applications of Statics, Including Problem-Solving Strategies

Make a good free-body diagram. Only show forces that act on the object.

Choose an X-Y coordinate system that is convenient.

Choose an axis of rotation location that is convenient. It will sometimes be possible to choose an axis location that causes the torque for one or more unknown forces to be zero.

Write down the necessary equations of static equilibrium. Solve the equation that only has one unknown. Use the value just found in the other equations and solve for other unknowns.

Check to see if your results are reasonable. Inspect your free body diagram as you make this check.

What questions do you have on the examples in this section?

Answers: Try to answer the questions on your own first.

Q1. 1\) If the force is applied at the axis of rotation the lever arm length = 0.

2\) If the force is applied parallel to the lever arm the angle is zero degrees \(or 180 degrees\) and sin\(θ\) is zero.

Q2. FALSE If the forces are applied at the center of mass the torque will be zero because the lever arms are zero.

Q3. FALSE If the forces are applied such that each force creates a clockwise \(or both counterclockwise\) torque the object will rotate.

Q4. FALSE The center of mass location for a donut is in the hole at the center of the donut.

Q5. In stable equilibrium a restoring torque \(opposed to the rotation that is taking place\) is created when the object is displaced.

Q6. In unstable equilibrium a torque is created that aids the rotation when the object is displaced.

#### Terms to Know

* equilibrium, torque, stable, unstable, statics

**/LO/** **9.4. Applications of Statics, Including Problem-Solving Strategies**

* Discuss the applications of Statics in real life.
* State and discuss various problem-solving strategies in Statics.

**/LO/** **9.5. Simple Machines**

* Describe different simple machines.
* Calculate the mechanical advantage.

**/LO/** **9.6. Forces and Torques in Muscles and Joints**

* Explain the forces and torques exerted by muscles.
* State how a bad posture causes back strain.
* Discuss various complexities in the real system of muscles, bones, and joints.

### 9.4 Applications of Statics, Including Problem-Solving Strategies

You will find suggestions for problem solving steps for statics in the previous reading guide and in the textbook. We may work some sample problems.

### 9.5 Simple Machines

#### To Do

#### Notes

A machine increases or multiplies force. The machines we will talk about take force from a human as input and output a larger force.

Previously we learned that Work = force \* distance . A human has a limited amount of energy available to do work. A human will apply a certain force over a distance of motion on the input to the machine. When the force is increased by the machine there will be a decrease in the distance the object moves. \("You can't get something for nothing."\) So….

force \* DISTANCE for the human = FORCE \* distance at the output of the machine.

The mechanical advantage of a machine is calculated by dividing the forces involved.

MA = F

## output

/ F

## input

e.g. For a certain machine a human applies 30 Newtons of force. The machine applies 90 Newtons of force to some object. The MA = 90/30 or MA = 3 .

Q1. If the object moves 8 cm from the action of the machine, what is the distance the human had to apply 90 Newtons of force?

We may do calculations with machines that use torque to create mechanical advantage.

But…Q2. Why does a pulley system have mechanical advantage?

### 9.6 Forces and Torques in Muscles and Joints

#### To Do

#### Notes

We may do some calculations of forces in muscles and joints using a simplified structure similar to the example problem worked out in the textbook.

Q3. Why should you not lift objects by bending your back into a horizontal position to reach to pick up a heavy object.

Answers: Try to answer the questions on your own first.

Q1. If we ignore energy loss due to friction, the work out = the work in. F

## out

\* d

## out

= F

## in

\* d

## in

Since the output force is 3 times larger than the input force, the input distance must be 3 times larger than the output distance. The human applies the force over a distance of 24 cm \(8 \* 3\).

Q2. The tension in the rope is the same in each section. The pulley system creates a situation in which multiple sections of rope are pulling upward on the object. The tension in the rope created by a human gets multiplied by the number of rope segments directed upward. This ignores friction in the pulleys.

Q3. When you bend over and pick up an object you are giving the weight of that object a large lever arm. The torque created by the weight of the object will be large. The muscles in your back have a smaller lever arm and consequently have to apply more force to match the torque due to the object. The muscles in your back and the structure of the spine can be damaged by these large forces.

#### Copyright

Copyright© 2015 by Greg Clements. Permission is granted to reproduce this document as long as \(1\) this Copyright notice is included, \(2\) no charge of any kind is made, and \(3\) the use is for an educational purpose. Editing of the document to suit your own class style and purposes is allowed.

