# Ch 07: Work, Energy, and Energy Resources

## Introduction

### Topics

- X

### Terms to Know

- energy, work, kinetic energy, potential energy, conservative force, force constant

**/LO/** 7.1. Work: The Scientific Definition

- Explain how an object must be displaced for a force on it to do work.
- Explain how relative directions of force and displacement determine whether the work done is positive, negative, or zero.

**/LO/** 7.2. Kinetic Energy and the Work-Energy Theorem

- Explain work as a transfer of energy and net work as the work done by the net force.
- Explain and apply the work-energy theorem.

**/LO/** 7.3. Gravitational Potential Energy

- Explain gravitational potential energy in terms of work done against gravity.
- Show that the gravitational potential energy of an object of mass m at height h on Earth is given by PEg = mgh .
- Show how knowledge of the potential energy as a function of position can be used to simplify calculations and explain physical phenomena.

**/LO/** 7.4. Conservative Forces and Potential Energy

- Define conservative force, potential energy, and mechanical energy.
- Explain the potential energy of a spring in terms of its compression when Hooke&#39;s law applies.
- Use the work-energy theorem to show how having only conservative forces implies conservation of mechanical energy.

## 7.1 Work: The Scientific Definition

### To Do

### Notes

Physics has a specific definition for work. For the work value to be non-zero the force that acts on the body must have a component in the direction of the displacement. You should read the text explanation and examples.

Q1. TRUE or FALSE The **work** done on a body is simply calculated by multiplying the net force acting on a body by the distance that the object travels.

Work= (Force component that is parallel to the displacement vector) \* displacement

W = F d cos(θ) or W = F cos(θ) d; θ is the angle between the force vector and the displacement vector

The metric unit of work is the Joule. 1 Newton of force acting parallel to a displacement of 1 meter does 1 Joule of work on the object.

## 7.2 Kinetic Energy (KE) and the Work-Energy Theorem

### To Do

### Notes

Energy also has a physics definition. Energy is not a substance. We will use energy calculations in order to solve problems related to the position or motion of objects. Energy can be defined as the ability of a body or system of bodies to perform work.

When we do work on an object we transfer energy to an object or take energy away from an object. The work and energy concepts provide a powerful tool for solving problems that cannot easily be solved with the methods we have studied before this chapter.

Our text derives Work = ½ mV

# 2

 – ½ m V

# o

# 2

 using the kinematic equations that rely on constant acceleration. Using the tools of calculus the same relationship can be derived for situations in which the acceleration changes. This relationship assumes that the object is moving in a horizontal direction (not closer or farther from the center of the Earth). This relationship assumes that the object is not compressing or extending any springs, etc. The reason for these assumptions will be explained as you read the chapter.

½ mV

# 2

 is a form of energy called Translational Kinetic Energy (KE). We will use a slightly different calculation to compute rotational kinetic energy in a future chapter.

You may notice that the kinetic energy has no direction associated with it. Kinetic energy is a scalar. You won&#39;t have to use components of vectors as much in this chapter compared to the chapters on Force.

Q2. TRUE or FALSE Objects A and B have the same mass. Object A is traveling at a velocity of 4 m/s North. Object B is traveling at a velocity of 12 m/s East. Object B has three times as much **translational kinetic energy** (kinetic energy) as object A.

Q3. TRUE or FALSE The stopping distance of a car depends on the square of the car&#39;s speed.

A satellite is moving in uniform circular motion around the earth. Is the force of gravity between the earth and the satellite equal to zero? What is the angle between the direction of the force of gravity on the satellite and the direction of the instantaneous velocity of the satellite?

Is the work done by the force of gravity of the earth on the satellite equal to zero? Explain. Ask for an explanation of this in class.

Suppose that in a certain situation the force acting on an object is not constant. We cannot use the four equations of motion V = V

# o

- at etc., to calculate the final velocity and final kinetic energy since the acceleration is not constant. If we are told the amount of work done on the object we can calculate the change in kinetic energy for the object and find the final velocity. This will be a common type of problem in this chapter.

Q4. A certain object has 20 Joules of kinetic energy. It is moving on a horizontal, frictionless surface. If its speed is doubled what is the new value of its kinetic energy?

What questions do you have on the examples in this section?

## 7.3 Gravitational Potential Energy (PE)

### To Do

### Notes

A system has &quot;potential&quot; energy due to its position (e.g. height above the floor) or configuration (e.g. compressed spring). The system can gain potential energy when work is done on the system. The system can release potential energy into the form of kinetic energy.

Work is required to lift an object in a vertical direction. The force applied must match the weight (mg) of the object. Work = F d cos(θ) . We will apply the force in an upward, vertical direction. You can replace F with mg. The angle is 0 degrees and the value of cos(0 degrees) is 1. The symbol &quot;h&quot; is the traditional symbol for a vertical displacement. When you make these substitutions you find that the work done in lifting an object by a height &quot;h&quot; near the surface of the Earth is

Work = m \* g \* h This work has given the object gravitational potential energy. There will be an elastic potential energy when work is done on a spring. During this process we assume that the value of the kinetic energy of the object did not change (i.e. started at rest, ends at rest at the new height). mgh actually calculates the change in the PE of the system due to the change in location. Only changes in PE are important in solving problems. The specific value of the PE at one location does not help you solve a problem (unless you know the PE is zero at the other point in the problem).

A student has left a 2 kg book on the floor. Suppose you do work on the book and lift it a distance of 1.5 meters such that you have given the book 29.4 Joules of potential energy. If the book slips out of your hand and falls back to the floor what is the speed just before it hits the floor? The potential energy the book has before it slips out of your hand will become kinetic energy as the book moves towards the floor. Just at the instant the book hits the floor all of the potential energy you gave to the book becomes kinetic energy for the book. The book has 29.4 J of KE. 29.4 J = ½ m V

# 2

 . 29.4 J = ½ (2 kg) V

# 2

 .

Solving for V we find V = 5.42 m/s.

Q5. TRUE or FALSE The location where the potential energy is zero (the reference level) is always at ground level.

Q6. Which situation has the greatest change in gravitational potential energy?

 a) A 5 kg ball is lifted from the ground to a point 2 meters above the ground.

 b) A 5 kg ball is moved from a table that is 0.5 meters above the ground to a shelf that is 2.5 meters above the ground.

What questions do you have on the examples in this section?

## 7.4 Conservative Forces and Potential Energy

### To Do

### Notes

For conservative forces the work done in moving between two locations only depends on the start and end positions. The work does not depend on the particular path (route) taken. Garvity and spring forces are conservative. Friction force is not conservative as the work done by friction will be greater if the distance traveled is greater. This is because the force of friction vector always changes to be opposite the direction of motion. The gravitational force vector is always pointed towards the center of the Earth and does not change direction as the object moves on its path.

Conservative forces have an associated PE. Non-conservative forces do not have an associated PE.

When a spring is relaxed we say that its stretch or compression value, X, is zero. In order to stretch or compress a spring you must apply a force to the spring. There is a linear relationship between the force applied and the stretch or compression of the spring. We mentioned this in a previous chapter:

Hooke&#39;s Law **F** = - k **X** I prefer this notation rather than the book&#39;s notation that uses ΔL. This notation emphasizes (using the minus sign) that the direction of the force due to the spring is in the opposite direction to the stretch or compression.

Recall that &quot;k&quot; represents the force constant. e.g. If a 10 Newton force is required to stretch a spring by 0.2 meters, the force constant is 10/0.2 or 50 Newtons/meter. &quot;k&quot; is a constant value for one particular spring. The force required to stretch this spring by 0.1 meters will be F = 50 N/m \* 0.1 meters or 5 Newtons. Springs that have smaller k values are easier to stretch. The value of &quot;k&quot; is ALWAYS positive.

Q7. Calculate k for a car spring if adding 900 kg of cargo to the car makes the body of the car sink toward the ground by 0.05 meters.

Note that the force is not constant as the spring is stretched. This leads to non-constant acceleration for spring motion problems. This is why we did not study springs in the earlier chapters. By using energy methods (KE , PE) we will be able to study the motion of springs.

The elastic potential energy is PE = ½ k X

# 2

 . Note that the PE is always positive since X is squared.

Q8. A spring has a force constant of 300 N/m. How much work is done when this spring is stretched by 6 centimeters? Assume that the spring is at rest before and after it is stretched. You do not know the value of the mass attached to the end of the spring.

What questions do you have on the examples in this section?

We will discuss the Law of Conservation of Energy in our next class session.

------

Answers: Try to answer the questions on your own first.

Q1. FALSE In some cases the net Force will not be parallel to the displacement. You must use the component of the force that is parallel to the displacement when you calculate work.

Q2. FALSE Object B will have 9 times more kinetic energy. The velocity is squared. Also, notice that the direction of the velocity has no effect on the amount of kinetic energy.

Q3. TRUE The brakes do work to take away kinetic energy from the car. The work done by the brakes is F \* d. The distance the brake pads &quot;move&quot; is related to the distance the car moves as it stops.

Q4. The kinetic energy is proportional to the square of the velocity. The velocity has increased by a factor of 2. The kinetic energy increases by a factor of 2

# 2

 . The new KE is 4 \* 20 Joules = 80 Joules.

Q5. FALSE You can set the zero point for PE at any location. Typically, PE will be zero at the start or end of the motion.

Q6. The change in the PE is the same for both situations. Only the height difference is important. &quot;h&quot; in mgh is the change in the vertical location. We will assume that &quot;g&quot; is constant near the surface of the Earth.

Q7. 900 kg creates a downward force of 900 \* 9.8 or 8820 Newtons. The spring pushes back with this force. k = F/x or 8820 N / 0.05 meters k = 1.76 x 10

# 5

 N/m

Q8. The work done is equal to the PE in the spring. W = ½ k X

# 2

 W = ½ (300 N/m) (0.06 m)

# 2

(Note the units N/m times m

# 2

 yield Newtons \* meters, the units of work.)

W = 0.54 Joules

### Terms to Know

- nonconservative, conservation of energy, efficiency

**/LO/** 7.5. Nonconservative Forces

- Define nonconservative forces and explain how they affect mechanical energy.
- Show how the principle of conservation of energy can be applied by treating the conservative forces in terms of their potential energies and any nonconservative forces in terms of the work they do.

**/LO/** 7.6. Conservation of Energy

- Explain the law of the conservation of energy.
- Describe KE, PE, Work done by friction
- Define efficiency of an energy conversion process as the fraction left as useful energy or work, rather than being transformed, for example, into thermal energy.

Beginning of Class

What questions do you have on gravitational or elastic potential energy?

e.g. #1 A 10 kg block of wood is resting on an inclined plane that has an angle of 62 degrees to the horizontal. The coefficient of friction is 0.0. The wood is 1.4 meters up from the bottom of the plane as measured along the direction of the plane. The wood is released from rest. Calculate the speed of the wood just before it reaches the bottom of the plane.

## 7.5 Nonconservative Forces

### To Do

### Notes

For a nonconservative force the path of motion makes a difference in the work done and the change in energy of the system. Friction always is in the opposite direction to the velocity. The full friction force, not just some component in the X direction for example, is used to calculate the work done by friction. The work done by friction is equal to the force of friction multiplied by the distance traveled, not by the straight line displacement.

Work Done by Nonconservative Forces

The concept here is that the amount of energy available at the start of the problem is not all available for KE and PE at the end of the problem because work is done by dissipative forces. KE

# 1

- PE

# 1

is the supply of energy at the start of the problem. KE

# 2

- PE

# 2

 is the amount of energy in the system at the end of the problem.

KE

# 1

- PE

# 1

- Work

# friction

 = KE

# 2

- PE

# 2

 The left side calculates the supply of energy at the start as adjusted by the work done by friction. The right side calculates the supply of energy at the end. If friction is present in a problem then KE

# 2

- PE

# 2

 \&lt; KE

# 1

- PE

# 1

.

Note that the PE terms are actually the work done by the conservative forces. It is just more convenient to express these energies as PE rather than Work calculations.

Q1. Why is the work done by friction always a negative number?

e.g. #2 A 10 kg block of wood is resting on an inclined plane that has an angle of 62 degrees to the horizontal. The coefficient of static friction is 0.22. The coefficient of kinetic friction is 0.18. The wood is 1.4 meters up from the bottom of the plane. The wood is released from rest. Calculate the speed of the wood just before it reaches the bottom of the plane. I will post a pdf file of the solution using the methods of chapter 4 and chapter 7.

What questions do you have for this section?

## 7.6 Conservation of Energy

### To Do

### Notes

We will use: KE

# 1

- PE

# 1

- Work

# friction

 = KE

# 2

- PE

# 2

 This is the same equation as used in section 7.5.

We will not put OE, Other Energy, terms in our equation.

KE is the energy for objects in motion, ½ m V

# 2

PE is the energy by virtue of position or configuration mgh for vertical problems, ½ k X

# 2

 for springs

Work

# friction

 will be a negative number as friction takes away energy.

In class or lab we may watch a video: Mechanical Universe #13 Conservation of Energy

Efficiency

Efficiency = Work Done by System/ Energy Put Into System

A new car engine might have an efficiency of 30% (according to the table in our text). Suppose you put $40 of gas into the tank of the car. This is the value of the energy put into the car. What is the dollar value of the work done by the engine?

0.30 = W / $40 so W = 0.30 \* $40 or $12 ! The other $28 basically went out the exhaust pipe.

For a total car system there is energy loss in the brakes, transmission, wheels, etc., so the overall efficiency drops to 20% or less.

Q2. Why do hybrid cars (electric motors on wheels, large battery, small engine, etc.) have higher efficiencies than other cars?

------

Answers: Try to answer the questions on your own first.

Q1. The friction force arrow is a direction 180 degrees opposite to the direction of the velocity.

Work = F cos( θ) d . The value of cos(180 degrees) is -1.

Q2. A large improvement in efficiency comes in the braking system. In a hybrid car, when you step on the brake pedal the motors that drive the wheels become electrical generators. During the braking process the batteries are recharged. On regular cars the braking process creates thermal energy that escapes into the environment and can&#39;t be used in the future to accelerate the car.

### Terms to Know

- power, kW\*h, renewable, nonrenewable, energy conservation

**/LO/** 7.7. Power

- Calculate power by calculating changes in energy over time.
- Examine power consumption and calculations of the cost of energy consumed.

**/LO/** 7.8. Work, Energy, and Power in Humans

- Appreciate the human body&#39;s consumption of energy when at rest vs. when engaged in activities that do useful work.

**/LO/** 7.9. World Energy Use

- Describe the distinction between renewable and nonrenewable energy sources.
- Explain why the inevitable conversion of energy to less useful forms makes it necessary to conserve energy resources.

## 7.7 Power (near page 245 in pdf)

### To Do

### Notes

Q1. You are told that two people do the same amount of work. If you are not given any other information can you be sure that the **power** ratings of the two people are equal?

Power

# AVG

 = work/time If 50 Joules of work are done in 10 seconds, power = 5 Watts

For systems in motion the power rating at certain time can be calculated from

 Power = F \* V . F is the force applied, V is the velocity

 Note the units are correct….. F \* V units are Newtons \* meters / second or J/sec

Were you surprised at the amount of waste heat created by a power plant?

The amount of energy consumed = Power \* time.

Q2. What is the cost of leaving a 75 watt light bulb on continuously for one year? Assume electricity costs 9 cents per kilowatt-hour (kW\*h).

## 7.8 Work, Energy, and Power in Humans

### To Do

### Notes

After you read this section you should understand why a room full of humans gets warm.

You should read this section for your own education. The courses in the Biology department can give you good opportunities to explore these topics. You should realize that there are good physics reasons for those discussions.

## 7.9 World Energy Use

### To Do

### Notes

On this page, list two forms of renewable energy sources and two forms of non-renewable energy sources.

You should look at the tables in this section. If you are interested, do some research on the Internet regarding the % of electrical power generated by nuclear power plants in France.

In class, discuss with your neighbors:

1. What motivates the world to use more non-renewable energy than renewable energy?
2. What is one thing you could do to reduce the consumption of energy in the USA?

Is it possible that human activities could affect our atmosphere? Most of our atmosphere is within 11 km of the surface ([http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Earth\_atmosphere](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Earth_atmosphere)). The radius of the earth is 6376 km. Make a scale drawing of the Earth and its atmosphere on a sheet of 8.5 x 11 inch paper. Hint: if you let 8.5 inches = 2\*6376 km (diameter of Earth) then the conversion factor is 1 inch = 1500 km.

Q3. What is the thickness of our atmosphere on this scale? Would you say the Earth has a thick or thin atmosphere?

There is no doubt that human activities are increasing the level of CO

# 2

 in our atmosphere. There is debate as to whether the levels of CO

# 2

 are harmful or reversible. This topic is worthy of your individual study or your study in an ecology course.

The USA _National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration has made available data from which these graphs are constructed.

[Images]

There is a difference in the phrase &quot;conserve energy&quot; when it is used in a physics sense and in more everyday use. The physics meaning tells us that we can&#39;t change the energy content of the universe. The everyday use tells us to consider how we can reduce the consumption of energy. Both meanings are important. We will focus on the physics use of the phrase.

------

Answers: Try to answer the questions on your own first.

Q1. No, you need to know the time required to do the work. If the work is done in a short time the power rating is high. If the work is done over a long time the power rating will be low.

Q2. E = P \* t so E = 75 Watts \* 1 year \* 365 days/year \* 24 hours/day

 E = 6.57 \* 10

# 5

 W\*h \* 1 kW\*h / 1000 W\*h This conversion creates kilowatt-hours

 = 657 kW\*h

Cost = E \* $0.09/kW\*h

 = 657 kW\*h \* $0.09/kW\*h

 = $59.13

 How many homes in the USA have a light on somewhere in the house for 24 hours /day????

Q3. 11 km \* 1 inch / 1500 km  0.0073 inches This is the thickness of our atmosphere on this sketch (about 7 thousandths of an inch, or about .02 cm, or about 0.2 mm). If you used a thin line to draw the circle of the Earth on your page, the atmosphere is about as thick as the line.

I would say the Earth has a thin atmosphere. It is thicker by about a factor of 100 than the atmosphere of Mars, but the atmosphere of Venus is about 100 times thicker than the Earth&#39;s atmosphere.

### Copyright

Copyright© 2015 by Greg Clements. Permission is granted to reproduce this document as long as \(1\) this Copyright notice is included, \(2\) no charge of any kind is made, and \(3\) the use is for an educational purpose. Editing of the document to suit your own class style and purposes is allowed.

# 