# Ch 03: Kinematics-2

## Two-Dimensional Kinematics

### Introduction

#### Topics

* X

#### Terms to Know

* vector addition and subtraction, negative vector, scalar multiplication
* analytic addition, component, hypotenuse, projectile motion
* vector addition

This chapter will move us toward understanding and solving problems where objects move in two dimensions. This chapter will also help your understanding of vectors and vector related calculations. This chapter is not a major step up in difficulty compared to chapter 2. You will still use the kinematic equations and your understanding of position, velocity, and acceleration. You will need to understand how to work with right triangles and trigonometric functions. Be sure to get help form the math lab or see me with your questions early as you study this chapter.

### 3.1 Introduction

#### To Do

**/LO/** 3.1. Kinematics in Two Dimensions: An Introduction

* Observe that motion in two dimensions consists of horizontal and vertical components.
* Understand the independence of horizontal and vertical vectors in two-dimensional motion.

#### Notes

We will usually only study problems in which the motion is over a small area and we can consider the Earth to be flat. We will usually not work problems in three dimensions.

For the example of walking in a city, why is it illegal to add 9 blocks + 5 blocks and get 14 blocks?

The following is a very important concept. You must NEVER directly add numbers that are not in the same \(straight line\) direction. I will talk about X-type numbers and Y-type numbers. We will have two sets of equations in our problems. One set of equations will apply to motion in the X direction. A separate set of equations will apply in the Y direction. Another way to state this concept is that motion in the X direction has no effect on motion in the Y direction. i.e. An acceleration in the X direction has not effect on velocity in the Y direction. This point will be covered again later in the chapter.

We may view a demo which shows this concept for the case of two objects in free-fall where one object is given a sideways velocity. The textbook shows the motion on page 89 of the pdf file.

I did not find the Ladybug demo that useful. If you want to run it I would suggest going to the PhET web site instead of trying to use the link in the pdf file.

[http://phet.colorado.edu/en/simulation/ladybug-motion-2d](http://phet.colorado.edu/en/simulation/ladybug-motion-2d)

Click on Run Now.

### 3.2 Vector Addition and Subtraction

#### To Do

**/LO/** 3.2. Vector Addition and Subtraction: Graphical Methods

* Understand the rules of vector addition, subtraction, and multiplication.
* Apply graphical methods of vector addition and subtraction to determine the displacement of moving objects.

#### Notes

You should review the description of vectors. I will usually draw an arrow above symbols that are vectors. Our textbook shows vector symbols in boldface.

The two methods of adding vectors are 1\) graphical and 2\) analytical \(mathematical\).

The tail of a vector is the starting part of the arrow. The head of the vector is the arrow part. For the graphical method you draw the first vector with an appropriate length and the correct angle to the X axis. You start drawing the second vector where the first vector ended. This creates the name of the method: "head-to-tail." When you draw the second vector you use an angle relative to a line that is parallel to the X axis. The resultant vector is drawn as a straight line starting at the beginning \(tail\) of the first vector that was drawn and ending at the head \(arrow\) of the last vector that was drawn. You should review the example in our text. The graphical method is always approximate.

What is the significance of a minus sign in front of a vector symbol?

Algebra allows performing subtraction through the addition process. Suppose we want to subtract 3 from 8. We could write 8 - 3 or 8 + \(-3\) and find the result of 5 either way. Vector subtraction is done by adding a negative vector. The method is similar to the calculation 8 + \(-3\) . Review the examples of vector subtraction in the text.

Multiplication of a vector by a scalar:

What is the meaning of 3 \* 5? 3 \* 5 is 5 + 5 + 5.

What is the meaning of 3X? 3X is X + X + X.

What is the meaning of 3 **A**? 3 **A** is **A** + **A** + **A**.

Multiplication of a vector by a scalar just makes the vector longer. If the scalar is negative the vector switches direction.

For section 3.3 you will need to know how to find the short sides of a right triangle when you are given the length of the hypotenuse and one of the angles in the triangle \(not the 90 degree angle\).

### 3.3 Vector Addition and Subtraction: Analytical Methods page 97 in pdf

#### To Do

**/LO/** 3.3. Vector Addition and Subtraction: Analytical Methods

* Understand the rules of vector addition and subtraction using analytical methods.
* Apply analytical methods to determine vertical and horizontal component vectors.
* Apply analytical methods to determine the magnitude and direction of a resultant vector.

#### Notes

Analytic addition of vectors produces accurate results. This is the preferred method for adding vectors and you should expect a problem like this on the exam. Having said that, it is worth your time to still make a quick graphical solution to all vector addition problems before you apply analytical methods.

In the typical problem you have two vectors that are specified with their magnitude \(length\) and angle to the positive X axis given. In the analytical method you will break the vectors into components using sine and cosine, add the X components, add the Y components, find the resultant vector's magnitude and angle.

Be careful in your thinking when you see **Ax + Ay = A** in the online textbook. The bold font should remind you that these quantities are vectors and must be added using the rules for adding vectors and not the rules of algebra you are used to using with numbers. It would be better to call **Ax + Ay = A** vector reconstruction rather than vector addition. You will use the X and Y components to find the resultant vector, **A**. The magnitude of A is found using the Pythagorean theorem and the angle of the vector is found by using the inverse tangent function and your brain. \(i.e. The inverse tangent function does not always give the right result.

To perform the mathematical addition of vectors we must be able to resolve vectors into their components. This is accomplished by the trigonometric calculations for a right triangle. The vector is always the hypotenuse in the right triangle. The X and Y components are the sides of the right triangle. If the angle is given in standard form \(i.e. measured counterclockwise from the positive X axis\) then you can always use the relationships below to find the components of the vector. If A is the magnitude of the vector then

A

## X

= A cos  and A

## Y

= A sin  .

Suppose a certain vector has a magnitude of 12 meters and a direction of 37 degrees from the positive X axis. What are the values of the components of the vector?

A

## X

A

## y

If you are given the components of a vector you can **reconstruct** the vector using the Pythagorean Theorem and the tangent function \(plus thinking\).

√ represents square root

A = √\( A

## X

## 2

* A

## Y

## 2

\) tan  = A

## Y

/A

## X

How is  found from this relationship? Is it always the correct angle?

Perform the reconstruction of A using the A

## X

and A

## Y

you found above.

Analytical \(mathematical\) addition of vectors \( **C = A + B \)** is performed by

1\) finding the components of each vector **A** and **B** ,

2\) adding "like" components e.g. C

## X

= A

## X

* B

## X

,

3\) reconstructing **C.**

Suppose **A** has a length of 3 meters and an angle of 30 degrees, **B** has a length of 7 meters and an

angle of 160 degrees. Find **C = A + B.**

When a problem has two dimensions you must work the problem using vector techniques. Make a vector diagram before you attempt to solve the problem.

You should work some of the example problems and let me know if you have questions.

### **3.4**  **Projectile Motion** \(near page 102 in pdf file\)

#### To Do

**/LO/** 3.4. Projectile Motion

* Identify and explain the properties of a projectile, such as acceleration due to gravity, range, maximum height, and trajectory.
* Determine the location and velocity of a projectile at different points in its trajectory.
* Apply the principle of independence of motion to solve projectile motion problems.

#### Notes

Displacement, velocity, and acceleration are vectors. When motion occurs in a direction not aligned with either the X or Y axis you must work two problems simultaneously. **It is very important that you keep all X quantities in one equation and all Y quantities in a separate equation**. The only quantity which will be common to both equations is the time value.

Your result will have X and Y components of the position, velocity, and acceleration. You will need to reconstruct the vector to determine the magnitude and angle of the displacement or velocity or acceleration.

Projectile motion refers to motion which takes place near the surface of a large mass \(e.g. the earth\). Perhaps your instructor will throw a soft object at a student who is sleeping at this early hour of the morning. Watch the object carefully as it flies through the air. The object is undergoing projectile motion. In projectile motion the vertical acceleration is 9.80 m/s

## 2

\(assuming the object is moving near the earth, not Mars etc.\)

What is the value of the horizontal acceleration?

What is true about the horizontal velocity?

Solving Projectile Motion Problems

The acceleration in the X direction is zero when we ignore air resistance. This causes the kinematic equations for the X motion to simplify to distance = rate \* time. The Y \(vertical\) equations will contain -9.8 m/s

## 2

for the acceleration value.

It is very important that you sketch the problem in projectile motion problems. You must choose a positive direction for the horizontal and vertical motion. You must choose the location for 0 for both the horizontal and vertical coordinates.

Here is the link for the PhET Cannon projectile motion simulation. Click Run Now! and try it.

[PhET Cannon](http://phet.colorado.edu/en/simulation/projectile-motion)

[http://phet.colorado.edu/en/simulation/projectile-motion](http://phet.colorado.edu/en/simulation/projectile-motion)

What questions do you have on any of the examples worked in the text?

### 3.5 Addition of Velocities \(near page 109 in pdf\)

#### To Do

**/LO/** 3.5 Addition of Velocities

* You should remember how to do vector addition.

#### Notes

Imagine a small airplane flying at 120 miles/hour at an angle of 30 degrees North of East. At least those are the numbers the pilot programmed into the computer that controls the flight of the plane. After one hour of flying the pilot discovers that the plane is 140 miles from the starting point at an angle of 35 degrees North of East. What could cause the airplane to end up at this position after one hour?

One answer would be that there was a "tailwind" pushing the plane with the tailwind having a little sideways component that changed the angle for the displacement.

You can solve problems that involve motion in a moving medium \(airplane in windy air; boat in a river, etc.\) by adding vectors. You need to add the vector of the motion to the vector for the motion of the medium. The resultant is the actual motion of the object.

If you are going to study for your private pilot's license or your captain of a vessel license you should work the rest of the problems in this section.

#### Copyright

Copyright© 2015 by Greg Clements. Permission is granted to reproduce this document as long as \(1\) this Copyright notice is included, \(2\) no charge of any kind is made, and \(3\) the use is for an educational purpose. Editing of the document to suit your own class style and purposes is allowed.

