# Ch 06: Circular

## Uniform Circular Motion and Gravitation

### Introduction

#### Topics

* X

#### Terms to Know

* arc, central angle, angular velocity, centripetal, centrifugal, Coriolis

**/LO/** **6.1. Rotation Angle and Angular Velocity**

* Define arc length, rotation angle, radius of curvature and angular velocity.
* Calculate the angular velocity of a car wheel spin.

**/LO/** **6.2. Centripetal Acceleration**

* Establish the expression for centripetal acceleration.
* Explain the centrifuge.

**/LO/** **6.3. Centripetal Force**

* Calculate coefficient of friction on a car tire.
* Calculate ideal speed and angle of a car on a turn.

**/LO/** **6.4. Fictitious Forces and Non-inertial Frames: The Coriolis Force**

* Discuss the inertial frame of reference.
* Discuss the non-inertial frame of reference.
* Describe the effects of the Coriolis force.

### 6.1 Rotation Angle and Angular Velocity

#### To Do

#### Notes

List some objects that you have seen rotate.

Q1. What is different about the physics of describing the motion of these objects?

Δθ= Δ S / r or S = r \* θ The central angle MUST be measured in radians. 2π radians = 360 degrees r is the radius of the circle. S is the length of the arc opposite the central angle.

You should know how to convert degrees to radians and radians to degrees using the conversion factor 2π radians = 360 degrees e.g. 45 degrees \* 2π radians / 360 degrees = 0.785 radians

Q2 What is the arc length if the radius is 1.6 meters and the central angle is 45 degrees?

The angular velocity is found by dividing the angle covered during the motion by the time.

ω = Δθ / Δt Angular velocity has units of radians/second

As the object moves around the circle it has a velocity tangent to the circle. The magnitude of the velocity is related to the angular velocity V = r \* ω The units for ω must be radians/second.

e.g. If ω is 3 radians/second and r is 1.2 meters then V is 3.6 meters/second.

### 6.2 Centripetal Acceleration

#### To Do

#### Notes

You should notice that the direction of the velocity changes as the object moves in a circle. An acceleration is needed to change velocity \(speed or direction\). The name of the acceleration for uniform circular motion is centripetal acceleration. Centripetal acceleration is directed towards the center of the circular path of the object which is moving in circular motion.

The centripetal acceleration is calculated from a

## c

= V

## 2

/ r where r is the radius of the circle and V is the magnitude of the velocity. Sometimes it is useful to use the rotation values to calculate the centripetal acceleration. You can substitute V = r \* ω for V in the a

## c

= V

## 2

/ r expression. When you simplify you find that

a

## c

= r \* ω

## 2

.

Q3. What happens to the value of the centripetal acceleration if the radius is held constant but the velocity \(m/s\) increases by a factor of 3 \(i.e. from 8 m/s to 24 m/s\)?

### 6.3 Centripetal Force

#### To Do

#### Notes

As we saw in Chapter 4, net external force causes acceleration. The centripetal acceleration, a

## c

, is caused by the centripetal force, F

## c

. It is true that F

## c

= m \* a

## c

or F

## c

= mV

## 2

/ r . Note that the centripetal force is perpendicular to the velocity. F

## c

only changes the direction of the velocity, it does not change the magnitude \(speed\) of the velocity.

You should work through the example of the friction needed for a car on a curve.

Examples of centripetal force include

1. Rubber stopper swung in a horizontal circle on the end of a string

   The string tension supplies the centripetal force.

2. Car driving around a flat curve

   Friction of the road on the tires supplies the centripetal force.

3. A satellite moving in a circular orbit around the Earth

   The force of gravity of the Earth on the satellite supplies the centripetal force.

4. Clothes in a washer during the spin cycle

   The wall of the rotating tub supplies an inward force on the clothes.

   Q4. Why does some water leave the clothes during the spin cycle? And, why does the tub of the washer have to spin so fast?

### 6.4 Fictitious Forces and Non-inertial Frames: The Coriolis Force

#### To Do

#### Notes

If you make observations in a non-inertial reference frame you will think that fictitious forces exist. That is to say, you will observe that objects don't obey Newton's laws of motion unless you invent a force that is not really present. In a rotating system this fictitious force is sometimes identified as an outward, centrifugal force.

e.g. The driver of a car making a sharp right turn will think there is a force pushing the driver towards the door near the left arm. Actually, your body is trying to move in a straight line and the car is turning into your body.

e.g. All parts of the earth make one rotation in 24 hours. The Earth rotates towards the east \(recall where the Sun rises!\) . But, objects located closer to the Earth's equator are farther from the rotation axis of the Earth. The rotation axis passes through the poles and the center of the Earth. Objects closer to the equator \(as compared to objects in Nebraska\) have a larger value for r in the equation V = r \* ω and thus have a larger velocity in meters per second towards the east. Imagine shooting a long range artillery weapon, mounted at the equator, towards the north. The artillery shell will keep its large eastward velocity due to the rotation of the Earth as it is shot out the barrel of the weapon towards the north. As the shell moves towards the north, it is traveling above land that has a smaller velocity \(meters/second\) towards the east. The observer on Earth will see the artillery shell land east of the target and will invent a "Coriolis" force directed towards the east to explain why it hit east of the target. The "Coriolis" force is not a real force. The deviation of the shell toward the east is just a consequence of the rotating Earth. This same effect is responsible for the direction of rotation of high and low pressure weather systems.

e.g. Imagine rolling a ball across a merry-go-round in the playground while you riding the merry-go-round. If friction is not a big effect the ball will travel in a straight line as viewed by an observer on a tree branch above the merry-go-round. But, the observer on the merry-go-round will see the ball move in a curve such that it heads towards the outer edge of the merry-go-round. The observer will claim that there is an outward centrifugal force that pushes the ball away from the center. The centrifugal "force" does not exist.

We may watch videos related to uniform circular motion.

Q5. List quantities that are uniform \(constant\) in uniform circular motion.

Q6. What force is necessary to keep the earth moving in a \(nearly\) circular orbit around the sun?

We may work this problem in class: A Ferris wheel has a radius of 8 meters and rotates once in 15 seconds. What force does the seat of the Ferris wheel apply to a passenger who has a mass of 80 kg and is currently at the highest point in the ride?

Answers: Try to answer the questions on your own first.

Q1. The objects don't travel in a straight line so we can't use our 4 kinematic equations. But have no fear, we will find that there exists 4 kinematic rotations for rotation that are extremely similar to the familiar kinematic equations you have mastered.

Q2. S = rθ S = 1.6 meters \* 0.785 radians = 1.26 meters

Q3. Think about the equation: a

## c

= V

## 2

/ r . a

## c

is proportional to the square of the velocity.

The value of the original a

## c

is a

## c

= \(1 \* V\)

## 2

/ r or a

## c

= 1 \* V

## 2

/ r If the velocity increases by a factor of 3 the value of a

## c

is now a

## c

= \(3\*V\)

## 2

/ r or a

## c

= 9 \*V

## 2

/ r . a

## c

increases by 3

## 2

or 9 times the original value.

Q4. The water molecules need an inward centripetal force to move in a circle during the spin cycle.

The adhesion force between the water molecules and the clothes cannot provide enough centripetal force when the velocity of spin is high. Recall: F

## c

= mV

## 2

/ r . The water tends to move in a straight line instead of a circle. The wall of the rotating tub in the washer constrains the water somewhat but the water flows along the wall of the tub and out through the holes on the wall of the tub. The clothes are too big \(we hope\) to fit through the holes in the wall of the tub and don't leave the tub \(except for an occasional sock !?\).

The tub has to spin fast to make the required value of F

## c

larger than the available force from the adhesion of the water to the clothes. The water will remain on the clothes and move in a circle until the spin speed reaches a point where F

## c

= mV

## 2

/r is larger than the adhesion force.

Q5. Magnitude of velocity, magnitude of centripetal acceleration and magnitude of centripetal force are constant. The full vectors for these items have a changing direction but a constant length.

Other constant items are radius and angular velocity. \(The angular velocity is a different sort of vector that we will touch on briefly in the unit on angular momentum.\)

Q6. Force of gravity from the Sun on the Earth

#### Terms to Know

* gravity, Cavendish, "weightlessness," geosynchronous

**/LO/** 6.5. Newton's Universal Law of Gravitation

* Explain Newton's Universal Law of Gravitation
* Describe the gravitational effect of the Moon on Earth.
* Discuss weightlessness in space.
* Examine the Cavendish experiment
* Know how to find the mass of a body from orbital data
* Know how to calculate the speed in an orbit
* Understand how the Moon creates tides and why there are two high tides around the Earth
* Understand why we always see one side of the Moon

### 6.5 Newton's Universal Law of Gravitation

#### To Do

#### Notes

The force of gravity can be calculated by this equation:

G M

## 1

M

## 2

Where F is the force, G is a constant,

F = -------------- M

## 1

and M

## 2

are the masses that are attracting,

R

## 2

R is the distance between the centers of the two objects

It takes two objects to produce a gravitational force.

The gravitational force always attracts, never repels.

If the mass is greater the force will be greater.

If the distance between the centers of the objects is greater the force will be less.

The effect of R is called an inverse square relation.

G = 6.673×10−11N ⋅ m2 / kg2This value was not known until 1798.

Q1. An astronaut weighs 180 pounds on the Earth. How much will the astronaut weigh when the astronaut is a distance of two times the radius of the Earth above the Earth? You don't need to do a detailed calculation. You can use the principle of proportions to solve this.

You should read the section on the book that discusses how the force of gravity of the Earth on the Moon creates the observed centripetal acceleration. Newton did not do this calculation since he did not know the value for G. But he did observe that the centripetal acceleration for the Moon is about 1/3600 of "g." Newton also knew that the distance to the Moon is about 60 \* R

## E

.

Q2. How would this have helped Newton confirm he was on the right track for his law of gravity?

Q3. TRUE or FALSE Jupiter exerts a gravitational force on you.

Some scientists who learned of Newton's ideas thought that gravity had a limited range \(e.g. some said the Earth's gravity did not extend beyond our atmosphere\). The study of comets by Edmund Halley \(of Halley's comet fame\) showed that the Sun's gravity extended throughout the solar system. As far as we know the force of gravity works the same way on Earth as it does throughout the universe. There are some extreme examples \(black holes\) that we don't have on Earth, but, in general, gravity works the same way throughout the universe.

Mass of the Earth

The acceleration due to gravity on an object can be measured. The radius of the Earth is known from surveying on the Earth \(and using proportions\). After the value for G, the constant in the Law of Gravitation, was measured scientists could calculate the mass of the Earth. You should convince yourself that this is possible.

The Earth exerts gravitational force on objects in space.

Q4. How could this fact be used to determine the mass of the Earth?

You should substitute Newton's expression for the force of gravity into the equation for centripetal force, F

## c

= mV

## 2

/R to eliminate F

## c

. Then simplify.

Masses of other planets and stars

Think how astronomers might find the mass of Pluto. No spacecraft has ever been there \(if you are reading this before July 2015\). If the size of the orbit and the time for one orbit for a moon of Pluto is measured then the mass can be calculated. The force of gravity from the planet provides the centripetal force for the orbiting moon. The only unknown is the mass of the planet. This method was used in 1978 to calculate the mass of Pluto. This same technique is used to find the mass for other planets, asteroids with moons, stars, and galaxies.

Orbital Speed

You may have noticed that a rocket headed to orbit does not leave the launch pad in a completely vertical path. The initial velocity but soon the rocket starts heading "down range." i.e. From the Florida launch facility the rocket starts moving eastward over the Atlantic Ocean. The vertical motion during launch is needed to get the rocket above the Earth's atmosphere to reduce air resistance to the motion. The horizontal \(down range\) part of the motion is needed to give the satellite enough speed to go into orbit around the Earth.

Satellites in orbit around the Earth are always pulled towards the Earth and accelerate towards the Earth. In order to not hit the Earth, the satellite has to have a forward speed parallel to the land underneath the satellite. As the satellite moves forward and falls towards the Earth, the land of the spherical Earth also "falls away" from the satellite. For the Earth, a satellite in circular "low Earth orbit" has an orbital speed of about 17,500 miles/hour. A low Earth orbit is an orbit that is only a few hundred miles above the surface of the Earth. A satellite in low Earth orbit takes about 90 minutes to complete one orbit.

Objects in orbit have a certain speed based on the mass of the planet and the size of the orbit.

1\) For a given orbit size, the speed of the orbit is greater if the mass of the planet is greater.

2\) For a given planet mass, the speed of the orbit is smaller if the orbit size is larger.

You should consider why both of these are reasonable statements given what you know about the calculation for the force of gravity.

In class we may calculate the speed for a satellite that orbits 250 miles above the Earth. We may also calculate the length of time for one orbit.

Geosynchronous Satellites

You have probably noticed that residential satellite TV dishes on different homes are pointed in the same direction. These dishes are receiving signals from a geosynchronous satellite.

Q5. Why doesn't the dish antenna have to continuously move to track the satellite across the sky?

In class we may calculate the size of the orbit for a geosynchronous satellite in orbit around the Earth.

The GPS network of satellites are in a medium Earth orbit. Your GPS device continuously receives signals from at least four of these satellites and can then calculate your position because it knows the positions of these satellites and the time they sent your device a signal. Reference: [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Global\_Positioning\_System](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Global_Positioning_System)

Escape Velocity

An object that is launched from a planet with "escape velocity" leaves the planet or star permanently. Its speed is large enough that the force of gravity cannot stop its motion and have it return to the planet or star. The escape velocity is equal to the square root of 2 times the circular velocity. The Earth's orbital velocity around the Sun is about 30 kilometers / second. \(You are carried along with the Earth 18 miles every second.\)

Q6. What is the approximate escape velocity for an object starting from the position of Earth's orbit?

There are four man-made satellites that are leaving our solar system, Pioneer 10 and 11 and Voyager 1 and 2. They were given the necessary escape velocity to leave the Sun. We may talk about some of the "recent" data returned by these satellites later in the course. If I forget to bring it up when we talk about the outer solar system please remind me.

Earth-Moon Orbit

The Earth and Moon both orbit the Sun. Their mutual gravitational forces cause both objects to wobble back and forth around the ellipse that is the path of the center of mass of the Earth –Moon system.

In class we may calculate the force of gravity between the Sun and the Earth and between the Moon and the Earth.

"Weightlessness"

The force of gravity gives an object weight. The force of gravity does not go to zero right above the surface of the Earth or above the surface of any body. Astronauts in orbit are not truly weightless. They are apparently weightless. Both the astronaut and the spacecraft are accelerating towards the Earth. Both the astronaut and the spacecraft are in orbit around the Earth. No contact force is needed so if an astronaut steps on a bathroom scale in orbit the scale reads zero. Imagine placing a pen on top of a whiteboard eraser. If they are both allowed to fall towards the floor the eraser will not apply any force to the pen. The pen is apparently weightless since there is no contact force between the objects.

VIDEO…Mass and Weight in Orbit We may watch this in class but perhaps not until a later day.

The Cavendish Experiment: Then and Now

You should read the books discussion this experiment.

Answers: Try to answer the questions on your own first.

Q1. The 180 pounds is the force value when R = 1 R

## Earth

. The mass of the Earth and the mass of the astronaut do not change when the astronaut is in space compared to their values on the Earth. We may not calculate the full gravity equation, we may use the concept of proportions. In space the distance to the astronaut from the center of the Earth is 3 R

## Earth

. The force \(weight\) will be less because R is larger. The force will be less by a factor of R squared. R is larger by a factor or 3 so the force is smaller by a factor of 9…. \(3

## 2

\). The new weight of the astronaut is 180 lbs / 9 or 20 lbs.

Q2. Note that 3600 is 60

## 2

Newton reasoned that the force became weaker proportional to the sqare of the distance between the centers of the objects.

Q3. TRUE Every piece of mass in the universe attracts every other piece of mass in the universe. That is why this gravity law is called the "universal" law of gravitation.

Q4. Occasionally small asteroids pass near the Earth. As they fly by the force of gravity from the Earth causes their flight path to change. Astronomers measure this change and then calculate the mass of the Earth.

Q5. A geosynchronous satellite is in an orbit relatively far from the Earth \(22, 236 miles above the Earth\). Reference: [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Geosynchronous\_satellite](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Geosynchronous_satellite)

At this distance the orbital speed \(slow\) and orbit size \(large\) combine to produce one orbit every 24 hours. The Earth also spins once in 24 hours. The position of the geosynchronous satellite in the sky is constant so the dish antenna does not need to move.

Q6. Square root of 2 is about 1.414. 1.414 times 30 kilometers/second is 42.4 kilometers/second. This is about 95 miles/second.

#### Terms to Know

* ellipse, tide, tidal lock

**/LO/** 6.6. Satellites and Kepler's Laws: An Argument for Simplicity

* Be aware of Kepler's laws of planetary motion.
* Derive the third Kepler's law for circular orbits. \(This was done in the class work on gravity.\)

Tides

Those who live in Nebraska have a handicap when it comes to appreciating tides. Tides in the ocean cause the water level to vary several feet \(or more\) depending on the location of the Moon in the sky.

The smooth Earth model shown in the PowerPoint is a little too much simplification. For the smooth Earth model the average height difference from low tide to high tide is about 3 feet. There are locations on Earth where the shape of the ocean floor causes the tides to vary by 60 feet. Also, the crust of the Earth flexes due to tides about 8 inches twice a day. \(Ref: Astronomy by Fix, 6

## th

ed. pages 94, 95\)

What questions do you have about how the high and low tides form?

Q1. TRUE or FALSE The tides are caused by the Moon's gravity lifting water off of the surface of the Earth.

The Moon has more tide effect than the Sun because it is closer to the Earth and the difference in the Moon's force at various points on Earth varies more than the Sun's gravity force at various points on Earth.

Tides Slow the Earth's Rotation

Water flowing on the Earth creates a friction force that slows down the rotation of the Earth. The slow down is only 0.0016 seconds per CENTURY but the effect is cumulative and noticeable over time. Corals have daily growth rings and seasonal growth rings similar to the annual growth rings of trees. The evidence indicates that the Earth only needed 22 hours for one rotation about 400 million years ago.

Also, the locations of solar eclipses from computer predictions don't match the locations recorded by ancient cultures unless the slow down of the Earth's rotation is taken into account. The Moon's shadow comes to small area at the Earth \(about 100 miles\). The eclipse track is often not parallel to the equator of the Earth. The Earth spins and places observers into position to have the Moon's shadow sweep across the observer. If the spin rate was 24 hours in the distant past the solar eclipses would have been seen from different locations than what is recorded.

Tides Enlarge the Moon's Orbit

Q2. How do astronomers know that the size of the Moon's orbit is increasing?

The Earth-Moon system has angular momentum in it spin and revolution. As the Earth slows down, the Moon must move to a larger distance from the Earth to keep a constant value for the angular momentum. This is a well confirmed law of physics.

TIDAL LOCK

The Moon always has one face towards the Earth because of an effect known as tidal lock. The Earth creates tides in the crust of the Moon that distort the Moon a little into a football shape rather than a perfect sphere. The long axis of the "football" points towards the Earth. If the Moon tries to rotate away from this alignment the force of gravity of the Earth creates a restoring force that brings the Moon back in line. You will need to look at the PowerPoint slide to better understand this effect.

Because of tidal lock the Moon spins once on its axis for every orbit around the Earth. This causes us to always see the same side of the Moon.

### 6.6 Satellites and Kepler's Laws: An Argument for Simplicity

#### To Do

#### Notes

Kepler's Laws of Planetary Motion

You don't need to memorize Kepler's Laws of planetary motion. You should know that Newton was able to derive Kepler's Three Laws of planetary motion using the Law of Universal Gravitation and calculus. You should be able to do the algebra of deriving Kepler's Third Law … you replace the V in the centripetal force with 2 pi V

## 2

/T and substitute the law of gravity for F

## c

.

Kepler's description that the planets traveled on ellipses with the Sun at one focus simplified the model of the solar system. Before this, solar system models that used circles had to have multiple circles to carry the planets around in order to approximately match the observed positions and motions of the planets. This was especially true for the Ptolemaic, Earth-centered, model of the solar system.

Space Debris

Man-made objects have been put into orbit around the Earth since 1957. In the process of putting satellites into orbit covers, small bolts, empty rocket fuel containers, etc. also went into orbit. The debris in space around the Earth is starting to become a problem. Some of the debris has substantial mass and all of it has substantial speed. A collision with an astronaut on a space walk or with a spacecraft could be fatal. Occasionally the thrusters on the International Space Station \(ISS\) are used to change the ISS orbit to prevent possible collisions with this debris.

Answers: Try to answer the questions on your own first.

Q1. False Water flows along the surface of the Earth to form the high and low tide regions.

Q2. Astronomers measure the time for laser beams to return to Earth from the Moon.

#### Copyright

Copyright© 2015 by Greg Clements. Permission is granted to reproduce this document as long as \(1\) this Copyright notice is included, \(2\) no charge of any kind is made, and \(3\) the use is for an educational purpose. Editing of the document to suit your own class style and purposes is allowed.

