# Ch 05: Dynamics-2

## Further Applications of Newton's Laws: Friction, Drag, and Elasticity

### Introduction

#### Topics

* X

#### Terms to Know

* friction, kinetic, static, drag force, terminal velocity, spring, stretch, compress, force constant

**/LO/** 5.1. Friction

* Discuss the general characteristics of friction.
* Describe the various types of friction.
* Calculate the magnitude of static and kinetic friction on a horizontal surface and on an incline.

**/LO/** 5.2. Drag Forces

* Define terminal velocity.

5.3. Elasticity: Stress and Strain

* State Hooke's law.
* Explain Hooke's law using graphical representation between deformation and applied force.

### 5.1 Friction

#### To Do

#### Notes

The force of **friction** is a result of the microscopic interaction of surfaces. We will not explore the details of this interaction. Instead we will use the simple model presented in the text to calculate the force of friction.

_Q1 True or False The force of friction always opposes motion._

_Static Friction f_

## s

≤ _μ_

## s

_N_, _μ_

## s

is the coefficient of friction. N is the normal force. On a horizontal surface N is equal to the weight of the object. Static means velocity = 0. Notice that the force of static friction is a variable force. Try pushing on something heavy with just one of your fingers. You should feel that the force increases until the object starts to move. If the force of static friction was always equal to _μ_

## s

_N_ the force of static friction could make things move. You would set something on a table and the object would start to move. The universe does not work this way. Instead, when a force is applied by some agent to an object, the static friction will oppose the tendency to move and will have a value equal to the applied force \(if possible\). As the force from the agent increases, the force of static fiction will increase. This continues up to the maximum value of the static friction force. At this point the object starts to move and we switch the calculation of friction to the kinetic friction equation.

The direction of friction is opposite to the applied force for static friction.

_Kinetic Friction\_\_f_

## k

= _μ_

## k

_N_, The direction of friction is opposite to the velocity for kinetic friction.

You should look at the table of friction coefficients.

_Q2 True or False The force of_ **static friction** _is usually larger than the force of_ **kinetic friction** _._

_Q3 What force makes you move forward when you walk?_

We may work this problem in class: A string is used to pull on a 3 kg object across a horizontal surface which has a coefficient of kinetic friction of 0.5. The coefficient of static friction is 0.6. The acceleration of the object is 0.3 m/s

## 2

. a\) What is the value of the tension in the string just before the object starts to move? b\) What is the tension in the string while the object is moving?

**Friction on Inclines**

Make a drawing that shows a 5 kg object on a frictionless plane which is inclined at 25 degrees to the horizontal. Show all of the forces that act on the object. a\) Find the magnitude of the **normal force** and the magnitude of the force acting on the object in a direction of "down the plane". b\) Now suppose that a 3 kg object is connected with a string at the upward side of the 5 kg object. The string passes over a pulley at the top of the ramp and the 3 kg object hangs vertically from the string. The 3 kg object does not touch the ground. The system starts at rest. Calculate the acceleration of the 3 kg object. Let the up-the-plane direction be the positive direction. c\) Calculate the tension in the string.

d\) repeat part b\) for the case of the coefficient of static friction = 0.12 and the coefficient of kinetic friction = 0.09

### 5.2 Drag Forces

#### To Do

#### Notes

The concepts of this section you need to know for the exam are

1\) the drag force increases as the velocity increases

2\) the terminal velocity occurs when the drag force magnitude equals the magnitude of the applied force

We may not work any problems on the material in this section.

### 5.3 Elasticity: Stress and Strain

#### To Do

#### Notes

For small stretch and compression Hooke's Law is valid

_F_ = _k_ Δ_L k is the "force constant" in units of Newtons/meter._ _Δ\_\_L is the stretch or compression in meters._

If a spring has a force constant of 60 N/m and it is stretched 4 cm the force is

60 N/m x 0.04 meters = 2.4 Newtons

It is important to note that the force is a "restoring" force. If a spring is extended it applies a force in the opposite direction to try to move the spring back to the original, unstretched, position.

We will only apply these concepts to springs. We may not calculate shear.

Q1 True

Q2 True

Q3 The force of static friction on your foot makes you move forward. This is a Newton's Third Law force pair with the the force the foot applies to the ground.

Friction on Inclines ... look for the pdf file of the solution

#### Copyright

Copyright© 2015 by Greg Clements. Permission is granted to reproduce this document as long as \(1\) this Copyright notice is included, \(2\) no charge of any kind is made, and \(3\) the use is for an educational purpose. Editing of the document to suit your own class style and purposes is allowed.

