# Ch 04: Dynamics-1

## Dynamics: Force and Newton's Laws of Motion

### Introduction

#### Topics

* X

#### Terms to Know

* dynamics, force, mass, inertia, inertial reference frame, internal force, external force, net force, system, weight

**/LO/** **4.1. Development of Force Concept**

* Understand the definition of force.

**/LO/** **4.2. Newton's First Law of Motion: Inertia**

* Define mass and inertia.
* Understand Newton's first law of motion.

**/LO/** **4.3. Newton's Second Law of Motion: Concept of a System**

* Define net force, external force, and system.
* Understand Newton's second law of motion.
* Apply Newton's second law to determine the weight of an object.

This chapter starts our discussion of Dynamics of motion. Dynamics is the study of what causes changes to take place in the motion of an object. The central concept in the chapter is that of Force. Force is a vector quantity. Newton developed a coherent set of laws that describe motion and describe how force causes a change in the motion of an object. These laws are concise statements that have a very wide range of applications for objects moving at slow speeds \(\&lt; 5% of the speed of light\). You should know that Newton made his contributions to physics in the last half of the 1600's.

The development of a sun-centered solar system model and the detailed orbits of the planets influenced the development of Newton's laws and Newton's Law of Gravitation. We will not delve too deeply into the study of planet orbits. You should know that astronomy had a major influence on the development of physics theories. This relationship between astronomy and physics continues to this day.

The material in this chapter is foundational to our work in future chapters. You should work through the cinemaple problems in each section and work problems at the end of the chapter that are in the student solution guide. If you have trouble understanding this chapter you may have trouble understanding future chapters this semester. See me, or a class mate, when questions arise.

### 4.1 Development of Force Concept

#### To Do

#### Notes

**force** … a push or a pull

_In what circumstances have you experienced a force? Are you experiencing any forces at this moment?_

**net force** … The vector sum of all forces which act on one object. The vector sum will be done using the methods of chapter 3. You will need to find the X and Y components of the net force. You should review right triangles and trig functions.

There are two categories of force: internal and external. Examples of internal force are forces between atoms or molecules in a solid or the force at the link between two railroad cars. Internal forces do not affect the motion of an object and we will be able to ignore them. External forces do affect the motion of the object. You will need to be able to sketch "free-body" diagrams that show the object and all of the external forces that act on the object. You will have to ignore any forces that do not act on the object of interest.

### 4.2 Newton's First Law of Motion: Inertia

#### To Do

#### Notes

The Greek natural philosophers believed that a constant push was required in order for an object to maintain a constant velocity. This was due to their lack of understanding of the force due to friction. Galileo and Newton understood friction and did have a correct understanding of the law of inertia.

**Newton's First Law** … An object has a constant velocity unless there is a non-zero net force acting on the object.

_What is inertia?_

_TRUE or FALSE The velocity an_ **inertial reference frame \(coordinate system\)** _must be zero._

In class we may view a video clip that illustrates Newton's First Law.

**mass** is a measure of the inertia of a body kilogram

Mass and Weight are different types of physics quantities. Mass is a measure of the inertia of an object. Weight is a measure of the gravitational force on an object.

### 4.3 Newton's Second Law of Motion: Concept of a System

#### To Do

#### Notes

In class we may watch a video clip that shows the effects on motion when mass changes and when force changes.

The word "system" is used often as we study physics topics this year. The system will often have more than one object in the system. Forces that exists between members of the system are internal forces and will be ignored. Forces that act on the system from outside the boundaries of the system are the external forces that must be considered. The people outside the wagon in Figure 4.5 are not in the system.

Imagine what happens to the acceleration of a system if the external force becomes larger.

Imagine what happens to the acceleration of a system if the mass \(inertia\) becomes larger.

This leads to the following form of the second law: **F**

## NET

**=** m **a\*\*** F\*\*

## NET

is the net external force \(the sum of all of the external forces that act on the object of interest\). A force of 1 Newton will give a 1 kg object an acceleration of 1 m/s

## 2

. The unit of force in the English system is the pound.

_TRUE or FALSE Newton's Second Law has been verified by experiments._

_What is true regarding the direction of the acceleration and the direction of the net force?_

_Why is a larger braking force required to stop a larger car in the same distance that a smaller car is stopped? You should think about the value of the acceleration for both cars. The cars have the same velocity before the brakes are applied._

Weight The downward force that accelerates objects towards the Earth is called weight. Weight is a vector that points toward the center of the Earth.

_TRUE or FALSE Objects that have more mass have more weight near the surface of the Earth._

_TRUE or FALSE Objects that have greater weight have greater acceleration values towards the Earth._

One way to calculate weight is to use W = m \* g. We will see another way to calculate weight when we study Newton's Law of Gravity. Try these algebra steps: 1\) Write F = ma, 2\) replace F with W, 3\) replace W with m\*g , 4\) solve for the acceleration, a.

_TRUE or FALSE Objects that have greater weight have greater acceleration values towards the Earth._

_TRUE or FALSE An astronaut who has a mass of 70 kg will have different weights on the Earth, the Moon, and Mars._

_TRUE or FALSE Astronauts on the International Space Station \(in orbit about 220 miles above the surface of the Earth\) have zero weight \(weightless\)._

What is the weight in Newtons, and in pounds, for an astronaut who has a mass of 70 kg?

At this point we will likely work some sample problems.

#### Terms to Know

* tension, normal force, inertial reference frames

**/LO/** **4.4. Newton's Third Law of Motion: Symmetry in Forces**

* Understand Newton's third law of motion.
* Apply Newton's third law to define systems and solve problems of motion.

**/LO/** **4.5. Normal, Tension, and Other Examples of Forces**

* Define normal and tension forces.
* Apply Newton's laws of motion to solve problems involving a variety of forces.
* Use trigonometric identities to resolve weight into components.

### 4.4 Newton's Third Law of Motion: Symmetry in Forces \(page 154 in pdf file\)

#### To Do

#### Notes

Can you think of a force in the universe that does not have another force associated with it that is equal in magnitude but opposite in direction?

_TRUE or FALSE_ _There are no isolated \(unpaired\) forces in the universe._

Newton's Third Law: Whenever one object exerts a force on a second object, the second object exerts an equal and oppositely directed force on the first object. **F**

## 21

= - **F**

## 12

The name "Action Reaction" for Newton's Third Law is misleading in that there is no time delay for the appearance of the "reaction" force. The two forces have equal magnitudes at all times.

_TRUE or FALSE The "action reaction" forces always act on different objects._

_TRUE or FALSE_ The apparent weight \(measured by a bathroom scale\) of a person riding in an elevator which is accelerating upward at 1 m/s

## 2

is smaller than the weight of the same person standing in the elevator as it moves upward at a constant rate of 3 m/s.

In class we may watch a video

on this topic.

Make a free-body diagram of a student who is sitting in a chair. Draw all of the forces that act on the student and all of the Third Law paired forces.

In systems where there is more than one object you should start your analysis by finding the net EXTERNAL force acting on the system and the total mass of the system. Then you will be able to calculate the acceleration of the system. After this step you will draw the free body diagram for a section of the system and calculate the tension in the connection between the masses.

A massless rope is attached to a block of wood that has a mass of 8 kg. A student is pulling to the right on the horizontal rope with a force of 9 Newtons. A 3 kg block of aluminum is attached by a massless string to the left side of the block of wood. The wood and aluminum are on a horizontal table. Ignore friction. Calculate the force the string applies to the aluminum object.

### 4.5 Normal, Tension, and Other Examples of Forces

#### To Do

#### Notes

**Contact force: a force that occurs between two objects when they are touching**

_TRUE or FALSE There is only one force in contact force situations._

**Normal force:** a contact force that is perpendicular to the surface

_TRUE or FALSE_ _Tension in a rope is a force._

Inclined Plane Problems When an object is on an inclined plane the weight vector is not parallel nor perpendicular to the plane. Remember that when we write equations we must only use quantities that are parallel to each other. We will be interested in the velocity along the plane and the displacement along the plane. How can you manipulate the weight such that you can use it in the equations?

Suppose a 5 kg object is resting on a frictionless inclined plane that has an angle of 38 degrees. The object is 1.3 meters up from the bottom of the plane. It is released from rest at a certain instant of time. Draw a free-body diagram at this time with the goal that you will calculate the time for the object to reach the bottom of the plane.

Calculate the component of gravity acting down the plane. Calculate the component of gravity perpendicular to the plane.

Calculate the acceleration of the object down the plane.

Calculate the time required for the object to reach the bottom of the plane.

Why didn't you use the force of gravity perpendicular to the plane?

What questions do you have on the skier example?

Why is it impossible for a real rope to not sag when a person is standing on the rope?

What questions do you have on the tightrope example?

Extended Topic: Real Forces and Inertial Frames Describe an inertial reference frame.

We will not work problems in this chapter where the reference frame is accelerating. If the observer is in a non-inertial reference frame the observer will think there are fictional forces present.

#### Terms to Know

* fundamental force, tension, inclined plane

**/LO/** **4.6. Problem-Solving Strategies**

* Understand and apply a problem-solving procedure to solve problems using Newton's laws of motion.

**/LO/** **4.7. Further Applications of Newton's Laws of Motion**

* Apply problem-solving techniques to solve for quantities in more complex systems of forces.
* Integrate concepts from kinematics to solve problems using Newton's laws of motion.

**/LO/** **4.8. Extended Topic: The Four Basic Forces—An Introduction**

* Understand the four basic forces that underlie the processes in nature.

### 4.6 Problem-Solving Strategies \(page 144 in pdf\)

#### To Do

#### Notes

1\) When forces are involved in a problem you must make a good sketch that shows all of the forces that act on the system of interest. Make sure you identify the system correctly and only use forces that act on the system of interest.

2\) Sketch in the components of forces if necessary. Remember to make the original force the hypotenuse of the right triangle. The X and Y components must be smaller numbers than the original force. List known values and values that can be assumed. Write down the unknown, the goal of the problem.

3\) When you are calculating the X and Y components inspect the right triangle carefully. You will not always use cos\( θ \) every time you calculate the X component. You will use cos\( θ \) to find the value of the component that is adjacent to the angle.

4\) Friction always opposes motion or the direction an object is tending to move.

5\) Calculate the net external force or write the expression in symbols for the net external force.

6\) Solve for the unknown and consider whether or not your value is a reasonable number.

### 4.7. Further Applications of Newton's Laws of Motion

#### To Do

#### Notes

ELEVATOR

We will discuss this problem. A person has a mass of 80 kg. a\) What is the person's weight in Newtons as shown on a metric bathroom scale on the surface of the earth? b\) The person is riding in an elevator which is moving upward at a constant velocity of 10 m/s. The person is standing on a metric bathroom scale. What is the scale reading? c\) The elevator is accelerating upwards at 2 m/s

## 2

. What is the bathroom scale reading? d\) The elevator is accelerating downwards at 9.8 m/s

## 2

. What is the scale reading?

For each part of this problem you need to apply F = m\*a. The person is the system of interest, not including the elevator and scale.

ATWOOD'S MACHINE

A simple Atwood's machine consists of a rope over a pulley with a mass attached to each end of the rope. Describe the motion of the system if the masses are both 5 kg.

Will the masses accelerate if one mass is 4 kg and the other mass is 6 kg?

Which way will it accelerate?

Will the magnitude of the acceleration for each object be the same value?

TRUE or FALSE The acceleration of the objects in an Atwood's machine is less than 9.8 m/s2.

We may discuss this problem. Calculate the magnitude of the acceleration when 4 kg and 6 kg are attached to the ends of a massless rope that passes over a frictionless pulley. Calculate the tension in the rope.

You need to start by taking the masses and rope as the system of interest. For the tension calculation choose either mass as the system of interest.

We may discuss the street light problem that is worked in the textbook.

### 4.8. Extended Topic: The Four Basic Forces—An Introduction

#### To Do

#### Notes

The four Fundamental Forces are 1\) gravity 2\) electromagnetic 3\) strong nuclear and 4\) weak nuclear. We will only discuss gravity this semester.

#### Copyright

Copyright© 2015 by Greg Clements. Permission is granted to reproduce this document as long as \(1\) this Copyright notice is included, \(2\) no charge of any kind is made, and \(3\) the use is for an educational purpose. Editing of the document to suit your own class style and purposes is allowed.

