# Ch 08: Momentum

## Linear Momentum and Collisions

### Introduction

#### Topics

* X

#### Terms to Know

* momentum, internal force, external force, impulse, conservation of momentum, collision, KE, elastic collision, inelastic collision

**/LO/** 8.1. Linear Momentum and Force

* Define linear momentum.
* Explain the relationship between momentum and force.
* State Newton's second law of motion in terms of momentum.
* Calculate momentum given mass and velocity.

**/LO/** 8.2. Impulse

* Define impulse.
* Describe effects of impulses in everyday life.
* Calculate average force and impulse given mass, velocity, and time.

**/LO/** 8.3. Conservation of Momentum

* Describe the principle of conservation of momentum.
* Derive an expression for the conservation of momentum.
* Explain conservation of momentum with examples.

**/LO/** 8.4. Elastic Collisions in One Dimension

* Describe an elastic collision of two objects in one dimension.
* Define internal kinetic energy.
* Understand an expression for conservation of internal kinetic energy in a one dimensional collision.
* Determine the final velocities in an elastic collision given masses and initial velocities.

### 8.1 Linear Momentum and Force

#### To Do

#### Notes

Your studies in this chapter will inform you about the second great conservation law of physics, conservation of momentum. Momentum is a very useful quantity for the analysis of motion of objects. It is calculated by multiplying the mass and velocity for an object. The symbol for momentum is p.

**p** = m **v** The units of momentum are kg m/sec. Momentum is a vector that has the same direction as the velocity of the object. The form of Newton's Second Law that we have been using is actually a special case of a more general law. **F**

## net

= Δ **p** / Δ t

The text shows how F = ma is derived from the general law.

Q1. TRUE or FALSE F = ma is the form of the original "Newton's Second Law."

Q2. TRUE or FALSE When a rocket is launched the equation F = ma is useful for finding the acceleration so we can use the four kinematic equations to determine the rocket's motion.

In a system that consists of more than one object, the total momentum is found by adding the separate momenta of each object.

### 8.2 Impulse

#### To Do

#### Notes

Impulse is found by multiplying the average force by the length of time that the force was acting. Impulse is equal to the change in momentum. F Δt = Δp

The Force will be the average, or effective, force during the time interval.

Q3. Two objects are thrown with a speed of 5 m/s toward a wall. Ball A stops when it hits the wall and does not rebound. Ball B rebounds.

**TRUE or FALSE** The impulse on Ball A is greater than the impulse on Ball B. You may assume the contact times are equal for the two collisions.

Q4. **TRUE or FALSE** The use of "shock absorbers" in car bumpers is just a marketing gimmick and has no practical benefit of reducing the damage to a car in a 5 mile/hour accident.

Think about the equation **F**

## net

= Δ **p** / Δ t and try to write an explanation of the importance of bending your knees when you land after jumping.

Q5. Describe the hitting technique that causes the greatest change in momentum for a tennis ball.

### 8.3 Conservation of Momentum

#### To Do

#### Notes

If the external forces add to zero then the total momentum of the system will be conserved \( **p**

## total

will be a constant\). Consider **F**

## net

= Δ **p** / Δ t . If the net force is zero then Δ **p** is zero. The momentum has not changed. We will use the expression p

## final

* p

## initial

= 0 or, p

## final

= p

## initial

The total momentum of an isolated system of bodies remains constant.

Q6. A halfback who weighs 180 pounds launches himself towards the goal line with the football at 10 m/sec. A 220 pound linebacker launches himself towards the halfback at 7 m/sec. They collide such that the football is just a fraction of an inch away from the goal line.

Will the ball cross the goal line?

**Questions for thought** :

Q7. Suppose that a car crash on 10

## th

street occurs and both drivers apply their brakes during the collision. Is momentum conserved for this collision? Explain.

Q8. Why does a rifle recoil when it is shot?

### 8.4 Elastic Collisions in One Dimension

There are three types of collisions that occur between objects:

1\) elastic \(also called perfectly elastic\) KE of the system is conserved eg. atomic collisions;

2\) inelastic some KE is lost e.g. kicking a football, hitting a tennis ball;

3\) completely inelastic much KE is lost e.g. a lineman tackles a halfback in football; two train cars link together; air track cars with velcro strips stick together; a ball is caught by a pendulum.

If the external forces can be ignored, momentum is conserved in all types of collisions. This fact makes the momentum quantity very useful in analyzing collisions.

Q9. True or False In a collision between a car and a truck, the force of the car on the truck is less than the force of the truck on the car.

When the equations of conservation of momentum and conservation of kinetic energy are combined we find that

V

## 1new

= V

## 1

\* \(m

## 1

– m

## 2

\) / \(m

## 1

* m

## 2

\) + 2 \* V

## 2

\* m

## 2

/ \(m

## 1

* m

## 2

\)

V

## 2new

= 2\*V

## 1

\*m

## 1

/ \(m

## 1

* m

## 2

\) - V

## 2

\* \(m

## 1

– m

## 2

\) / \(m

## 1

* m

## 2

\)

The answers to the following may be given in class.

How do these equations simplify for the case of V

## 2

= 0 \(target at rest\) and

a\) m

## 1

= m

## 2

? b\) m

## 1

\&gt;\&gt; m

## 2

? c\) m

## 1

\&lt;\&lt; m

## 2

?

Try this demonstration on your own and share your observations with someone in the class: Lay a marble in the groove of a plastic ruler \(or just on the table\).

a\) Shoot a marble with similar mass at the stationary marble. Observe the collision.

b\) Shoot a massive steel ball at a stationary marble. Observe the collision.

c\) Shoot a marble at stationary, massive, steel ball. Observe the collision.

What is "Newton's Cradle?"

Answers: Try to answer the questions on your own first.

Q1. FALSE F = change in momentum / time interval is the original form of Newton's second law.

Q2. FALSE The mass will be changing so the acceleration is not constant.

Q3. FALSE The change in momentum for ball B is twice as large as the change in momentum for ball A so the force on B is larger by a factor of 2. Also, consider the work done by the forces. The force on ball A has just stopped the ball. The force on ball B has stopped the ball and then accelerated it away from the wall.

Q4. FALSE The shock absorber creates a longer time of collision which leads to a smaller contact force and less damage to the bumper.

Q5. Follow through the swing. This will lead to longer contact time and more impulse.

Q6. Each player has momentum. When they meet in the air, instead of having their feet pushing on the ground, the external force is zero. If one or both players push on the ground you cannot use conservation of momentum to solve this problem. One of the players has positive momentum and the other negative as one of the velocities will be in the negative direction. You don't need to convert units. Mass is proportional to weight on the Earth. You must use the same units on both sides of the conservation of momentum equation.

180 lb \*10 m/s - 220 lb \* 7 m/s = \(180 lb + 220 lb\) \* V

## final

V

## final

= + 0.65 m/s . The velocity of the two person lump is positive so the touchdown is scored.

Q7. No The net external force is not zero due to friction of the road on the cars.

Q8. The momentum of the system before the rifle is shot is zero. The explosion in the chamber that pushes the bullet out the rifle is an internal force. Assume that the rifle is only lightly held so the external force is about zero. The total momentum of the bullet and the rifle must be zero after the shot is fired. The bullet goes in one direction with positive momentum. The rifle moves in the other direction with negative momentum.

Q9. False. The forces have the same magnitude. This is a Newton's Third Law concept.

#### Terms to Know

* elastic, inelastic,

**/LO/** **8.5. Inelastic Collisions in One Dimension**

* Define inelastic collision.
* Explain perfectly inelastic collision.
* Apply an understanding of collisions to sports.
* Determine recoil velocity and loss in kinetic energy given mass and initial velocity.

**/LO/** **8.6. Collisions of Point Masses in Two Dimensions**

* Discuss two dimensional collisions as an extension of one dimensional analysis.
* Define point masses.
* Solve problems using conservation of momentum along x-axis and y-axis.
* Describe elastic collisions of two objects with equal mass.
* Determine the magnitude and direction of the final velocity given initial velocity, and scattering angle.

**/LO/** **8.7. Introduction to Rocket Propulsion**

* State Newton's third law of motion.
* Explain the principle involved in propulsion of rockets and jet engines.
* Discuss the factors that affect the rocket's acceleration.
* Describe the function of a space shuttle

### 8.5 Inelastic Collisions in One Dimension

#### To Do

#### Notes

In an inelastic collision the KE may increase or decrease.

Q1. What could cause an increase in KE during a "collision?"

Q2. What could cause a decrease in KE during a collision?

These problems are easier to solve if we assume the collision is totally inelastic instead of partially inelastic. The objects in an inelastic collision will stick together after the collision.

Q3. A train car has a mass of 50,000 kg. It is moving at 4 m/s to the right on frictionless tracks. A second train car has a mass of 40,000 kg. It is moving at 3 m/s to the left. They collide and stick together. What is the final velocity of the cars? What % of the original KE is lost?

### 8.6 Collisions of Point Masses in Two Dimensions

#### To Do

#### Notes

In this section the text considers collisions that have velocities in both the X and Y directions. To solve these problems you will do two conservation of momentum calculations. The momentum is conserved separately in the X and Y directions. The text does the more general case of glancing blows. We will only consider totally inelastic collisions. You should glance at the material in the textbook in this section but don't spend much time trying to figure out the example problems.

We will not take rotation into account in this chapter. We will only consider "point masses" that have no size and don't rotate. The point masses may be lumps of clay that hit such that they don't cause rotation.

Q4. A 3 kg lump of clay has a velocity along the x axis of 6 m/s. A 7 kg lump of clay has a velocity along the Y axis of 5 m/s. The two objects hit at the origin of the X-Y coordinate system. What are the values of the X and Y components of the velocity after the collision?

### 8.7 Introduction to Rocket Propulsion

#### To Do

#### Notes

As a rocket blasts off the mass of the rocket is changing. The thrust created by the rocket engine is about constant so the acceleration will be variable. You cannot use the four kinematic equations for solving rocket problems. Conservation of momentum can be used to solve rocket problems.

The basic concept for rocket propulsion is that fuel is ignited in a rocket engine. The rocket engine is in the rear of the rocket. The gas achieves a high temperature and expands at high speed out a nozzle of the engine. The hot gas pushes on the rocket engine. The rocket engine pushes on the gas. As the rocket gases leave the engine they carry momentum. To conserve momentum the rocket and remaining unused fuel move at a larger velocity forward than they had before the hot gas left the engine.

The thrust of a rocket engine can be calculated by multiplying the mass of hot gas that leaves the engine per second times the speed that the hot gas leaves the engine. The thrust has units of Newtons. You should verify this.

Q5. A rocket has a mass of 450,000 kg on the launch pad. What minimum thrust is needed to launch the rocket vertically upward?

Q6. Why do rockets seem to accelerate slowly at first and then accelerate much rapidly later?

Answers: Try to answer the questions on your own first.

Q1. If the system is a canon or bullet before it is fired the initial KE is zero but there is significant KE \(from the stored chemical energy\) afterwards. If the system is a compressed spring the spring can give up PE to become KE. In these situations, the system starts as one object but becomes two or more objects after the "collision."

Q2. In collisions where objects stick together some KE will be converted to thermal and sound energy. Also, energy is used up if the shapes of the objects are deformed. In the inelastic collisions we will study the system starts as two or more objects but becomes one object after the collision.

Q3. Since the friction is zero \(not a bad approximation for train cars\) momentum is conserved.

50000 \* 4 + 40000 \* \(-3\) = \(90000\) Vfinal Vfinal = 0.889 m/s.

The kinetic energy before is ½ \(50000\)\(4\)

## 2

* ½ \(40000\)\(-3\)

## 2

or 580,000 Joules

The KE after is ½\(90000\)\(.889\)

## 2

or 35,560 Joules

The percent loss of KE is \(35,560 – 580,000\) / 580,000 or 93.9% !

Q4. In the X direction conserve momentum: p before = p after

3 kg \( 6 m/s \) + 7 kg \(0 m/s\) = 10 kg V

## x

V

## x

= 1.8 m/s

In the Y direction conserve momentum: p before = p after

3 kg \( 0 m/s \) + 7 kg \(5 m/s\) = 10 kg V

## Y

V

## Y

= 3.5 m/s

Q5. The upward thrust must at least balance the weight of the rocket.

Thrust \&gt;= 450,000 kg \* 9.8 m/s

## 2

or 4.41 million Newtons

Q6. Thrust - mg = ma or a = \(Thrust – mg\)/m

At first m is large and mg is large since all the fuel is still in the rocket. As the amount of fuel is reduced mg becomes smaller and m becomes smaller. The largest value for the acceleration occurs just as the fuel runs out. This assumes the thrust is constant.

#### Copyright

Copyright© 2015 by Greg Clements. Permission is granted to reproduce this document as long as \(1\) this Copyright notice is included, \(2\) no charge of any kind is made, and \(3\) the use is for an educational purpose. Editing of the document to suit your own class style and purposes is allowed.

