# Ch 02: Kinematics

## Introduction

### Topics

- X

### Terms to Know

- after this day: displacement, delta, scalar, vector, speed, velocity, acceleration, average, instantaneous

**/LO/ 2.1. Displacement**

- Define position, displacement, distance, and distance traveled.
- Explain the relationship between position and displacement.
- Distinguish between displacement and distance traveled.
- Calculate displacement and distance given initial position, final position, and the path between the two.

**/LO/ 2.2. Vectors, Scalars, and Coordinate Systems**

- Define and distinguish between scalar and vector quantities.
- Assign a coordinate system for a scenario involving one-dimensional motion.

**/LO/ 2.3. Time, Velocity, and Speed**

- Explain the relationships between instantaneous velocity, average velocity, instantaneous speed, average speed, displacement, and time.
- Calculate velocity and speed given initial position, initial time, final position, and final time.
- Derive (make approximate sketch of) a graph of velocity vs. time given a graph of position vs. time.
- Interpret a graph of velocity vs. time.

**2.4. Acceleration**

- Define and distinguish between instantaneous acceleration, average acceleration, and deceleration.
- Calculate acceleration given initial time, initial velocity, final time, and final velocity.

Prof. Clements Intro....The study of motion will occupy much of our time this semester. This chapter presents the description of motion. Later chapters will present the cause of motion (force). It is important to have a good foundation on the description of motion so you can better understand situations where the force needs to be analyzed. Another simplification in this chapter is that we will only let objects move in one line. The object may move back and forth but the motion will be in a straight line. For this straight line motion you can imagine a ball moving back and forth in the track under the white board.

## 2.1 Displacement

### To Do

### Notes

In order to describe the motion of an object we need to make measurements of the position as a function of time. Position measurements are made in a reference frame. A straight line with a zero mark at some location can be a reference frame.

Displacement is the change in position of an object. When working in one dimension the direction of change is indicated by a + or - in front of the size of the displacement.  X = X

# f

- X

# o

 The  (delta) symbol tells us to subtract two numbers. We only need the final and initial position values. We do not need to keep track of the intermediate positions of the object.

A certain person walks 80 cm north, 60 cm south and 30 cm north. What is the displacement?

size of the displacement \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ direction of the displacement \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Note that displacement is incomplete if it is missing either the size (magnitude) of the displacement or the direction.

Along our X axis we will use + to indicate displacement in the positive direction. A - sign will indicate displacement in the negative direction.

In the real world objects seldom travel on a perfectly straight line with no reversals of motion. As real objects move they will move along curves and straight lines and may back up. The total path length covered is called the distance traveled.

How does distance differ from displacement?

TRUE or FALSE Distance traveled is usually larger than the magnitude of the displacement.

TRUE or FALSE Distance traveled can never be equal to the magnitude of the displacement.

## 2.2 Vectors, Scalars, Coordinate Systems

### To Do

### Notes

Quantities that have both a size (magnitude) and direction are called vectors. Displacement is a vector. The + or - sign is enough to indicate direction. You don&#39;t have to use words such as left or right to describe the direction of the displacement.

List two quantities that are scalars.

What is the main difference between a scalar and a vector.

We will be using the Cartesian coordinate system (three axes at right angles to each other, X Y Z). Usually this semester we will restrict our discussions to motion in at most 2 dimensions. For horizontal motion we will describe positions along a X axis. For vertical motion we will describe positions along a Y axis.

As you work on problems you must choose the positive direction and the negative direction. You should label this direction with a + on the sketch you make for the problem. Once you select the + direction you must make sure all of the values you write down from the word problem are consistent with the + direction you have selected. i.e. If you choose the + direction to the right and the object moves to the right 5 meters in 2 seconds you would use a displacement value of + 5 meters.

You will often have some freedom in where to place the origin of the coordinate system. Does the placement of the origin affect the results of motion calculations? i.e. For an object moving on a straight track it doesn&#39;t matter if we choose the origin (X = 0) of the coordinate system to be at the left edge of a track or at the middle of the track or at the right edge of the track. The position numbers do change, but the important quantities of velocity and acceleration will be the same regardless of the location of the origin of the coordinate system.

## 2.3 Time, Velocity, Speed

### To Do

### Notes

When time has elapsed there will be a change. e.g. the hands of clock have moved, your heart has made a beat, a leaf has moved, a sound has been detected, the Earth has moved in its orbit around the Sun, etc. The time for motion to take place will be used in calculating velocity and speed. We will often refer to some clock and say the time on the clock is 0 seconds at the start of the motion and equal to some value, t, at the end of the motion. The time interval, Δt = t

# f

 -t

# o

, will simplify to just t

# f

 when

t

# 0

 has a value of 0.

The average velocity is found by dividing displacement by time. Because displacement is a vector the velocity is also a vector. If an object has a displacement of +8 meters in 4 seconds the average velocity is +2 meters/second. The &quot;+&quot; sign indicates the direction is to the right on the axis.

Instantaneous velocity, v, is the velocity of the object at a particular instant of time.

Consider a car stopped a red light on a city street. Suppose that after the light turns green the driver presses lightly on the gas pedal for two seconds and the car starts moving faster and faster until it reaches some final velocity. During this two second time interval after the light turns green the car will have some average velocity (that will be smaller than the final velocity). The instantaneous velocity will be different at each instant of time until the car reaches its final velocity. The speedometer of the car (approximately) gives the velocity at each instant of time.

Instantaneous velocity, v, can be found by calculating  X /  t as  t approaches 0. This requires the use of Calculus.

Another term that describes motion is speed. Speed and velocity are usually much different quantities. The distinction in these quantities comes from using the distance traveled or the displacement.

The average speed = (total distance traveled) / (time required)

Is speed a scalar or a vector?

One can also calculate the instantaneous speed by considering a very small time interval.

How far did you drive to come to Midland University this semester?

How much time was required for the trip?

Calculate your average speed \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Imagine a map of your journey and estimate the displacement. Calculate your average velocity

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ (Why are there two blanks?)

Will the average velocity value usually be larger, the same size or smaller than the average speed?

Why?

The size of the instantaneous velocity is called the speed of the object. Speed does not have a direction. Quantities that do not have an associated direction are called scalars. Speed is a scalar.

The textbook shows some graphical representation of motion. Why does the red graph of position vs. time have a downward slope for its second half? (page 44 of the pdf but the page number on the document says page 42)

## 2.4 Acceleration (near page 45)

### To Do

### Notes

The measure of the rate of change of velocity is called acceleration. The average acceleration is found by dividing the quantities v and t.

a

# avg

 = v/ t The direction of the acceleration should be specified, but this can be done with + and - .

Suppose an object has a velocity of + 2 m/s at time = 0 and then has a velocity of +9 m/s at a time of 2 seconds. The average acceleration is ( 9 m/s - 2 m/s) / 2 seconds or (7 m/s) / 2s or +3.5 m/s

# 2

 .

If the acceleration value is constant, the velocity would be 2 m/s at time 0, 5.5 m/s at time = 1 second, and 9 m/s at time = 2 seconds. If the acceleration continues the velocity would be 12.5 m/s at time = 3 seconds.

The discussion in the text about deceleration is correct but we won&#39;t focus on this technicality. The key concept is that if the acceleration has a - value then the velocity is becoming more negative each second. Acceleration values will be + and - in homework and exam problems. e.g. At time = 0 the velocity is 15 m/s and the acceleration is -4 m/s

# 2

. At time = 1 second the velocity would be 11 m/s. At time = 2 seconds the velocity would be 7 m/s, etc.

How would you compare the mathematical connection between velocity and displacement to the connection between acceleration and velocity?

The instantaneous acceleration is the acceleration value at an instant in time.

We will not do calculations of velocity or acceleration using graphs.

You should work through some of the examples and let me know if you have a question on how these problems are worked.

What questions do you have on the graphs of position, velocity, and time. You should be able to make approximately accurate graphs of velocity and acceleration if you are given the graph of position vs. time. We won&#39;t do any numeric calculations in creating the velocity or acceleration graphs. We will just estimate the value of the velocity and acceleration and quickly sketch the graph.

Check your understanding of the concepts with these questions.

TRUE or FALSE If the velocity is zero then the acceleration is zero.

TRUE or FALSE If the velocity is positive then the acceleration is positive.

TRUE or FALSE If the acceleration is zero then the velocity is zero.

What is the meaning of an acceleration of - 3 m/s

# 2

 ?

You can find a list of instructional, pre-class, YouTube videos for introductory physics lectures, and videos of example problems, at http://physics.gpclements.com.

Terms to Know

- constant acceleration, kinematic equations
- /LO/ 2.5. Motion Equations for Constant Acceleration in One Dimension
- Calculate displacement of an object that is not accelerating, given initial position and velocity.
- \*\* Note by Prof. Clements We will most often just calculate final position, not displacement.
- Calculate final velocity of an accelerating object, given initial velocity, acceleration, and time.
- Calculate displacement and final position of an accelerating object, given initial position, initial velocity, time, and acceleration.
- \*\* Note by Prof. Clements We will most often just calculate final position, not displacement.

**/LO/**  **2.6. Problem-Solving Basics for One-Dimensional Kinematics**

- Apply problem-solving steps and strategies to solve problems of one-dimensional kinematics.
- Apply strategies to determine whether or not the result of a problem is reasonable, and if not, determine the cause.

## Section 2.5 Motion Equations

### To Do

### Notes

The early part of this chapter described position, velocity, and acceleration. In section 2.5 these quantities will be connected in equations. There are four equations of motion that we will use. You should be familiar with the book&#39;s notation. It is standard notation. The time value at the start of the interval will be taken to be zero. The final time is labeled t. Any symbol with a subscript 0 is a quantity at time = 0. The quantities without a subscript are the final values.

If the acceleration is constant the acceleration may be some positive number or zero or some negative numbers. &quot;Constant acceleration&quot; does not automatically mean that the acceleration is zero. Also, some students have a misconception that if the acceleration is constant then the value of the velocity is zero. The previous statement is not true.

If the acceleration is a constant +5 m/s

# 2

 , then every second the velocity will increases by 5 m/s. i.e. Suppose the velocity is +3 m/s at time = 0. After one second the velocity would be +8 m/s. After two seconds the velocity would be +13 m/s. As a check, calculate the average acceleration a = (V – V

# o

 ) / t using the t=0 and t=2 seconds data.

There are two basic equations of motion. Using these two equations we can apply some algebra and develop two more useful equations. There are four useful kinematic equations of motion. The term kinematic tells us that we are not worrying about the cause of motion with these equations. The kinematic equations just describe motion.

The following development of the four equations is in a slightly different order than our textbook but we will end up with the same equations of motion.

1. By definition a = V / t or a = (V - V

# o

 ) / t Multiply both sides by t and add V

# o

 to both sides. **Equation 1 V = V**

# o

 **+ at**

2. You should understand how equation 2.28 is found . Equation 2.28 lets us calculate the final position if we know the initial position, the average velocity and the time. It turns out that the average velocity can be found by adding the initial and final velocities and then dividing by 2.

**X = X**

# o

 **+ ½ (V + V**

# o

**) t** This is only valid when the acceleration is constant. Why?

I will refer to this as **Equation 2**.

Suppose the acceleration is 4 m/s

# 2

, the initial velocity is +3 m/s, and the initial position is 7 meters. a) What is the velocity when t = 5 seconds? Answer: **V = V**

# o

 **+ at**

V = 3 m/s + 4 m/s

# 2

 \* 5 sec V = 23 m/s

b) What is the position of the object at t = 5 seconds? Answer: **X = X**

# o

 **+ ½ (V + V**

# o

**) t**

X = 7 meters + 0.5 ( 3m/s + 23 m/s) 5 seconds

X = 7 meters + 0.5 ( 26 m/s) 5 seconds

X = 7 meters + 13 m/s \*5 seconds Note \* indicates multiplication

X = 7 meters + 65 meters X = 72 meters

3. near page 57 in pdf We can combine the first two equations by substituting for V in equation 2 with the expression for V from equation 1. This will generate an equation that does not contain the final velocity. Start with equation 2 X = X

# o

- ½ (V + V

# o

) \* t

Replace V with the expression from equation 1 X = X

# o

- ½ ( [V

# o

- at] + V

# o

) \* t

You should use the principles of algebra to simplify this. Tell me if you don&#39;t get

**Equation 3 X = X**

# o

 **+ V**

# o

 **\* t + 0.5 \* a \* t**

# 2

e.g. Suppose the acceleration is 4 m/s

# 2

, the initial velocity is +3 m/s, and the initial position is 7 meters. Find the position at time = 5 seconds. Treat the final velocity as unknown.

X = 7 meters + 3 meters/s \* 5 sec + 0.5 \* 4 meters/s

# 2

 \* ( 5 sec )

# 2

X = 7 meters + 15 meters + 50 meters

X = 72 meters Does this result sound familiar?

It is worth examining equation 3 for the case of acceleration = 0. With a = 0 the equation becomes X = X

# 0

- V

# 0

 \* t or (X - X

# 0

 ) = V

# 0

 \* t You may recognize this as being similar to your math problems from high school …. Distance = rate \* time. D = rt D = rt is only valid if the rate is constant (i.e. acceleration = 0)

e.g. Initial position = 0 meters, a = 0, initial velocity +4 m/s, time = 3 seconds

D = 4 m/s \* 3 seconds = 12 meters

4. We can combine the first two equations by solving for time in equation 1 and substituting this expression for t into equation 2. You should do these algebra steps and let me know if you can&#39;t get

**Equation 4 V**

# 2

 **= Vo**

# 2

 **+ 2 \* a \* (X – Xo)**

e.g. Suppose the acceleration is 4 m/s

# 2

, the initial velocity is +3 m/s, the initial position is 7 meters, and the final position is 72 meters. Find the final velocity. Treat time as unknown.

V

# 2

 = (3 m/s)

# 2

- 2 \* 4 m/s

# 2

 \* ( 72 meters – 7 meters)

V

# 2

 = 9 m

# 2

/s

# 2

- 8 m/s

# 2

 \* 65 m

V

# 2

 = 9 m

# 2

/s

# 2

- 520 m

# 2

/s

# 2

 or V

# 2

 = 529 m

# 2

/s

# 2

Take the square root of both sides and you find V = 23 m/s . Does this result sound familiar?

You now know the 4 kinematic equations. These equations only give correct results when the acceleration is constant but that covers many situations that we will study this semester. The law of conservation of energy (future chapter) will help us solve problems when the acceleration is not constant.

You should work through some of the examples in the textbook until you are comfortable using these equations. If there is an example that doesn&#39;t make sense ask me to go over the calculations steps in class or in my office.

## 2.6 Problem-Solving Basics for One-Dimensional Kinematics (near page 62 in pdf)

Read through the suggested steps for problem solving. I strongly recommend that you start by reading the entire problem. Then read it again and make a sketch of the situation. The sketch does not need to be artistic. Sketch the objects (stick figures, boxes, circles, etc.) and select some coordinate system. Label 0 on your coordinate system. Use arrows to indicate velocities and acceleration. Write down the numeric values next to the symbols we use in the 4 kinematic equations. Know the physics concepts and select an equation that will help you towards the solution.

For some problems you may have to use more than one equation before you arrive at the final answer. That doesn&#39;t happen too often in this chapter but it will be the case in general this semester.

It is also very important to check that your answer is reasonable. For some situations you won&#39;t know what is reasonable (e.g. speed of an electron). Do your work by yourself and then check with a class mate to see if they have the same answer. I allow a slight range of answers for homework and exam problems to account for differences on how students round intermediate values in the calculations. But, I would suggest that you store intermediate results in the memory of your calculator and don&#39;t round off numbers before you reach the final result. Then write down 3 significant figures and circle your answer.

### Terms to Know

- acceleration due to gravity, free-fall

**/LO/** 2.7. Falling Objects

- Describe the effects of gravity on objects in motion.
- Describe the motion of objects that are in free fall.
- Calculate the position and velocity of objects in free fall.

**/LO/** 2.8. Graphical Analysis of One-Dimensional Motion

- Describe a straight-line graph in terms of its slope and y-intercept.
- \*Estimate average velocity or instantaneous velocity from a graph of position vs. time.
- \*Estimate average or instantaneous acceleration from a graph of velocity vs. time.
- \*Make an approximately accurate graph of velocity vs. time from a graph of position vs. time.
- •\*Make an approximately accurate graph of acceleration vs. time from a graph of velocity vs. time.
- These learning objectives have been modified from what you see in the textbook.

## 2.7 Falling Objects Near page 64 in pdf file

### To Do

### Notes

**Free fall** is vertical motion with only the force of gravity acting on the object. (i.e. ignore air resistance and don&#39;t allow any propulsion)

**\*g** is the symbol for the **acceleration due to gravity** Near the earth&#39;s surface the value of g is about 9.80 m/s

# 2

. (The value of g changes slightly based on various conditions of the location that we will ignore.) g tells us how much the velocity of an object in free fall will change every second (9.8 meters/second). g is not gravity. Gravity is a force, not an acceleration. Gravity produces an acceleration.

For vertical motion I will usually use the symbol Y for the position of the object. I will try to usually use X for position when the motion of the object is in the horizontal direction. We will assume that the motion is occurring near the surface of the Earth. In this case, the value of &quot;g&quot; will be constant. We will usually ignore air resistance. Are we allowed to use the 4 kinematic equations for vertical motion?

Write the 4 kinematic equation with these changes. Wherever X appears use Y. Wherever &quot;a&quot; appears use &quot;g.&quot;

Note: Some people have a misconception that the value of the free-fall acceleration depends on the weight of the object. In reality, all objects near the earth have a free-fall acceleration of g (9.8 m/s

# 2

 ) if air resistance is ignored. We will prove this when we discuss force and Newton&#39;s laws.

Suppose that an object is dropped from rest and is in free fall from a height of 400 meters. Calculate the position of the object for every second before it hits the ground. Is equation &quot;3&quot; a good choice for this calculation? Where will you put Y = 0 meters? Is Y positive in the upward direction or downward? (These questions do not have one right answer!) You are in control of labeling your coordinate system. The analysis will give identical physical results for an infinite number of choices for the 0 point and + or – direction. Make your sketch and do the calculations below this paragraph. I will usually label the ground as Y = 0 meters and assign the upward direction as +.

You should work through the example of free-fall in the text.

What questions do you have on the graphs of the motion?

Why is the acceleration graph a horizontal line? Why does it seem that the value of a is

 -10 m/s

# 2

?

Work other sample problems until you are comfortable with free-fall problems. Let me know if you have questions on the example problems.

## 2.8 Graphical Analysis of Linear Motion

### To Do

### Notes

A straight line can be represented by the equation Y = m \* X + b. The English language (and other languages) does not have enough symbols for all the variables that might be discussed. The Y and X symbols here are NOT vertical and horizontal position. They are just the coordinates of a Cartesian coordinate system.

 &quot;m&quot; is the slope of the line. It is common to calculate the slope by dividing the &quot;rise&quot; by the &quot;run.&quot; The &quot;rise&quot; is the change in the vertical variable value. The &quot;run&quot; is the change in the horizontal variable value.

 &quot;b&quot; is the Y-intercept. For the graph represented by Y = 5X + 3, what is the value of the Y intercept?

What is the value of Y when X = 0?

What is the value of Y when X = 1?

By what number do the previous two numbers differ?

The slope of a portion of a graph can be found by drawing a straight line tangent to the graph. A tangent line touches the graph at the time of interest and has equal spacing between the tangent line and the graph on both sides of the touch point.

The slope of the tangent line on a graph of X vs. time gives information about the instantaneous velocity at that time. The slope of the tangent line on a graph of v vs. time gives information about the instantaneous acceleration at that time. You should be able to draw a tangent line on a graph and find the slope value.

The area under the graph of velocity vs. time gives information on the change in position of the object. The area under the graph of acceleration vs. time gives information on the change in velocity of the object.

### Copyright

Copyright© 2015 by Greg Clements. Permission is granted to reproduce this document as long as \(1\) this Copyright notice is included, \(2\) no charge of any kind is made, and \(3\) the use is for an educational purpose. Editing of the document to suit your own class style and purposes is allowed.

# 