# Ch 01: Introduction: The Nature of Science and Physics

## Introduction

### Topics

- X

### Terms to Know

- model, law, theory, SI, metric, English, significant figure, uncertainty

**/LO/**  **1.1. Physics: An Introduction**

- Explain the difference between a principle and a law.
- Explain the difference between a model and a theory.

**/LO/**  **1.2. Physical Quantities and Units**

- Perform unit conversions both in the SI and English units.
- Explain the most common prefixes in the SI units and be able to write them in scientific notation.

**/LO/**  **1.3. Accuracy, Precision, and Significant Figures**

- Determine the appropriate number of significant figures in both addition and subtraction, as well as multiplication and division calculations.
- Calculate the percent uncertainty of a measurement.

**/LO/**  **1.4. Approximation**

- Make reasonable approximations based on given data.

## 1.1

### To Do

### Notes

Einstein noted that he was amazed that the universe is understandable.

I agree with the author that one of the outcomes of a physics course is that the student is able to apply physics principles to a wide variety of situations.

Physicsis concerned with describing the interactions of \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Why do you think many fields of study (e.g. engineering, medical school, PT school, optometry, etc.) list physics as a required course?

In what situations are &quot;models&quot; helpful?

TRUE or FALSE As soon as one experiment agrees with a hypothesis the hypothesis is called a theory.

When is a theory called a law?

How is a theory proven to be wrong?

Some would simplify the book&#39;s description of the scientific method to three steps:

1. observe 2. make a hypothesis 3. perform a controlled experiment

This three-step description has assumptions of other activity in the steps which is OK.

It is common to discover book titles from the 1700&#39;s and 1800&#39;s titled &quot;Natural Philosophy.&quot;

(Optional: View books.google.com and search for natural philosophy.)

Give the approximate end date for the era known as classical physics.

Give the approximate start date for the era known as modern physics.

The spring semester of this course sequence will only cover the highlights of relativity and quantum mechanics.

 You will need Java enabled on your computer to run the equation grapher. This tool is not required for this course but it is a nice interactive tool.

This course will use metric units, but I will often convert into English units so you can get a better feel for the quantities being calculated. You need to know how to convert units from English to metric and metric to English.

Why is the Earth&#39;s rotation no longer used to define the unit of time?

How was it possible for the French to know the distance from the North Pole to the equator in 1791?

Why was the platinum-iridium bar set aside as the standard for the meter?

The kilogram is set by a physical object that is kept in Paris. What do you think about the statement in the text that an &quot;exact replica&quot; of the standard kilogram is kept by the NIST?

You should memorize the power of ten values for these prefixes: mega, kilo, centi, milli, micro.

When are two numbers called &quot;the same order of magnitude?&quot;

You should view Table 1.3 for examples of powers of 10.

Extra Material not in the text: It is worth your time to view this video:

Powers of Ten http://www.powersof10.com/ Hover the mouse over powers of 10 on the left edge. Then click on the &quot;Film&quot; link at the top center of the page.

Conversions....I would recommend that you write in a division by 1 for the starting number. This will help you to see which units are in the numerator and which are in the denominator. For example, in calculation 1.1 this would mean that you show the division of 80 m by 1. Then you can see that the meters unit is in the numerator. The conversion factor has to have the meter unit in the denominator to cancel the meter unit in the numerator.

Self Test ... Convert 1 microCentury into minutes.

Let me know what questions you have on Example1.1. You should work through each step.

## 1.3

### To Do

### Notes

I don&#39;t quibble over the terms precision and accuracy.

Uncertainty is an important concept. Scientists want to communicate how much confidence they have in a result. e.g. 6.07 cm + or - 0.02 cm represents a better data item than 6.07 + or - 0.08 cm.

We will practice with uncertainty during lab.

You should be able to calculate percent uncertainty.

We will practice with significant figures in lab. I will not ask you to spend the time to worry about significant figures for homework or exam problems.

Approximation is a valuable skill. Sometimes approximation calculations are called &quot;back of the envelope&quot; calculations. This implies a quick calculation with little concern for precise answers. A very famous person who used this method was Enrico Fermi. What did he work on in World War II?

Some examples of approximation can be found at http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fermi\_problem .

You should download the student solution manual from the openstaxcollege.org site and work through several example problems for every chapter.

In future reading guides you may find references to the Mechanical Universe videos. These videos are freely available online at [http://www.learner.org/resources/series42.html](http://www.learner.org/resources/series42.html) .

YouTube videos of my before-class lectures and example problems are indexed at physics.gpclements.com.

### Copyright

Copyright© 2015 by Greg Clements. Permission is granted to reproduce this document as long as \(1\) this Copyright notice is included, \(2\) no charge of any kind is made, and \(3\) the use is for an educational purpose. Editing of the document to suit your own class style and purposes is allowed.

# 