# Ch 10: Rotations-2

## Rotational Motion and Angular Momentum

### Introduction

#### Topics

* X

#### Terms to Know

* rotation, angular acceleration, angular velocity, angle, radian, kinematics, dynamics, moment of inertia, torque

**/LO/** **10.1. Angular Acceleration**

* Describe uniform circular motion.
* Explain non-uniform circular motion.
* Calculate angular acceleration of an object.
* Observe the link between linear and angular acceleration.

**/LO/** **10.2. Kinematics of Rotational Motion**

* Observe the kinematics of rotational motion.
* Derive rotational kinematic equations.
* Evaluate problem solving strategies for rotational kinematics.

**/LO/** **10.3. Dynamics of Rotational Motion: Rotational Inertia**

* Understand the relationship between force, mass and acceleration.
* Study the turning effect of force.
* Study the analogy between force and torque, mass and moment of inertia, and linear acceleration and angular acceleration.

This chapter will explain why rotation occurs and what parameters affect the value of the angular acceleration and angular velocity. You will notice a LOT of the mathematics of very similar to work we have already done … e.g. angular velocity, torque, kinematics, dynamics. The steps you use in problem solving will be VERY similar to techniques you have used in previous chapters. So, read on and enjoy the study of motion from a rotating perspective.

### 10.1 Angular Acceleration

#### To Do

#### Notes

We have already discussed some of the terms we will use for rotational motion.

s = rΘ v = rω ω is the angular velocity ω = \(∆Θ\)/\(∆t\)

ω will be positive if the rotation is counterclockwise \(CCW\) and negative if the rotation is CW.

α is the angular acceleration α = \(∆ω\)/\(∆t\)

This angular acceleration is NOT the centripetal acceleration. It is simply a description of how rapidly the angular velocity is changing.

Q1. TRUE or FALSE In a rotating system, the standard unit of angular measure is the degree.

Q2. TRUE or FALSE Angular velocity is identical to linear velocity.

Imagine that a meter stick is mounted horizontally with one end on an axis. The meter stick then rotates around the axis.

Q3. TRUE or FALSE All parts of the meter stick have the same angular velocity.

Q4. TRUE or FALSE All parts of the meter stick have the same linear velocity.

Q5. TRUE or FALSE Angular acceleration is the same as centripetal acceleration.

### 10.2 Kinematics of Rotational Motion

#### To Do

#### Notes

You should look at the kinematic equations for rotation in the table. On the first line of the table, the bar above ω indicates that this is the average angular velocity, \(1/2\)\(ω + ω

## o

\) Note that the textbook sets the initial angle and initial angular velocity equal to zero for these equations. The equations below allow for those quantities to be non-zero, as they will be for some problems.

The mathematical form of these equations should look familiar.

ω = ω

## o

* αt  Θ = Θ

## o

* \(1/2\)\(ω + ω

## o

\)t Θ = Θ

## o

* ω

## ot

t + \(1/2\)αt

## 2

ω

## 2

= ω

## o

## 2

* 2αΘ

Q6. The kinematic equations for rotational motion may be used for all rotation problems.

Q7. In a certain music CD player, the CD reaches an angular speed of 500 revolutions per minute. This angular speed is obtained 5 seconds after the unit is turned on. What is the value of the angular acceleration?

Q8. How many revolutions did the CD make during these first 5 seconds?

What questions do you have over this section?

### 10.3 Dynamics of Rotational Motion: Rotational Inertia

#### To Do

#### Notes

The moment of inertia is also known as the rotational inertia. The rotational inertia is a measure of how difficult it is to give an object angular acceleration. Recall that mass measures the difficulty to cause an object to accelerate. The rotational inertial depends on the mass of the object and where the object is located. For one point mass I = mr

## 2

where r is the distance of the mass to the axis of rotation. For the real world we must consider the shape of objects that rotate. This done theoretically by summing the value of mr

## 2

for every bit of mass in the system.

I = Σmr

## 2

Look at the table in this section that shows I calculations for various shapes. We will use these formulae. Part of the problem solving steps is to recognize what shape the object has and then use the correct formula for I to calculate the moment of inertia.

In linear motion, force caused acceleration. If there was more mass, the acceleration value was smaller.

In rotational motion, torque causes angular acceleration. The greater the value of the moment of inertia, the smaller the value of the angular acceleration.

τ = Iα Note that when you use this equation, α MUST be in units of radians/sec

## 2

.

α has units of radians/sec

## 2

τ has units of Newtons \* meters

τ = r F sin\(Θ\)

Q9. TRUE or FALSE The constant of proportionality between the torque and the angular acceleration is called the moment of inertia.

Q10. TRUE or FALSE The value of the moment of inertia only depends on the mass of the object.

What questions do you have on this section?

Answers: Try to answer the questions on your own first.

Q1. False The radian is the standard unit. For some problems the angles may be measured in degrees. This will only be the case if no linear units \(meters, meters/sec, etc. \) are used in the problem.

Q2. False v = rω v and ω differ by a factor of r.

Q3. True

Q4. False \(see question 2\)

Q5. False The angular acceleration is related to a linear acceleration that is tangent to the circle, not to the acceleration that is directed toward the center of the circle.

Q6. False The angular acceleration MUST be constant, just as we required for the kinematic equations for linear motion.

Q7. 500 rev/min is 8.33 rev/sec. Use equation 1. Note that the angular unit of revolutions is fine. You may convert to radians but for this problem it is not required.

8.33 rev/sec = 0 + α \* 5 sec So α = 1.67 rev/s

## 2

Multiply by 2 π radians/ 1 revolution to get α = 10.5 radian/s

## 2

Q8. Use equation 3 Θ = Θ

## o

* ω

## ot

t + \(1/2\)αt

## 2

Θ = 0 + 0 + \(1/2\)\(1.67 rev/sec

## 2

\)\* \(5sec\)

## 2

 20.9 revolutions

If you changed units to radians you should get 131.3 radians \* 1 revolution / 2 π20.9 rev.

Q9. True

Q10. False The distribution of mass affects the value of I.

#### Terms to Know

* rotational kinetic energy, conservation of energy, work, angular momentum, conservation of angular momentum

**/LO/** **10.4. Rotational Kinetic Energy: Work and Energy Revisited**

* Calculate rotational kinetic energy.
* Demonstrate the Law of Conservation of Energy.

**/LO/** **10.5. Angular Momentum and Its Conservation**

* Understand the analogy between angular momentum and linear momentum.
* Observe the relationship between torque and angular momentum.
* Apply the law of conservation of angular momentum.

**/LO/** **10.7. Gyroscopic Effects: Vector Aspects of Angular Momentum PHY161 only**

* Describe the right-hand rule to find the direction of angular velocity, momentum, and torque.
* Explain the gyroscopic effect.
* Study how Earth acts like a gigantic gyroscope.

### 10.4 Rotational Kinetic Energy: Work and Energy Revisited

#### To Do

#### Notes

When an external force acts on an object to produce rotation the work done is:

Work = torque \* θ This is similar to Work = force \* distance.

If the work is delivered to an object that has a fixed axis, the object will gain rotational kinetic energy instead of linear kinetic energy. Linear kinetic energy exists if the center of mass is moving. e.g. The wheel of the tire of a car has both rotational KE and linear KE as the car goes down the road.

rotational kinetic energy \(1/2\)I ω

## 2

Q1. TRUE or FALSE Conservation of Energy principles cannot be used in problems that involve rotation.

Translational, or linear, kinetic energy is computed with ½ m V

## 2

where V is the velocity of the center of mass. The center of mass of an object which is rotating on a fixed axis does not move but the object does have rotational kinetic energy \(1/2\)I ω

## 2

.

Q2. TRUE or FALSE The rotational kinetic energy of an object cannot be larger than the translational kinetic energy of the object.

Q3. A hoop and a solid disk are placed at the same height above a table on a ramp. The objects have the same mass and the same radius. When the objects are released from rest, the disk will reach the bottom of the ramp first.

### 10.5 Angular Momentum and Its Conservation

#### To Do

#### Notes

Angular momentum, L, is calculated as follows: L = I ω Use radians/sec for ω. You will need to use the table of shapes to find the correct calculation for I.

The rotational equivalent of Newton's Second law for linear motion is

F = Δ p / Δt

The rotational equivalent of Newton's Second Law is

τ = Δ L / Δt L = I ω Both I and ω may change.

For linear motion, momentum was conserved if there was no net external force. Angular momentum is conserved if there is no net external torque. You should understand why this is true by inspecting the equation for the rotational equivalent of Newton's Second Law.

If the net external torque is zero and 1 denotes before some event and 2 denotes after the event, then

L

## 1

= L

## 2

or I

## 1

ω

## 1

= I

## 2

ω

## 2

What questions do you have for these topics?

### 10.6 Collisions of Extended Bodies in Two Dimensions

We are skipping this section.

### 10.7 Gyroscopic Effects: Vector Aspects of Angular Momentum

#### To Do

#### Notes

There are some interesting and unexpected results for gyroscopic effects. Question to Ponder: Has Polaris always been the North Star?

Answers: Try to answer the questions on your own first.

Q1. False We will include a term for the rotational kinetic energy. The sum of KE + PE will be the same at the start and end of a problem if there is no work by friction or some other outside force. If there is some external force we would need to know the value of the work it performs on the object of interest to proceed with the energy analysis to the problem.

Q2. False If the object spins on a fixed axis the translational KE is zero while the rotational KE is not zero.

Q3. True The disk has a smaller value for I. You should write down the statement of conservation of energy for this situation. The masses of the objects are not important. If you use just symbols for the KE and PE you will see that m cancels. There is a fixed supply of initial energy, mgh. The object with the larger I has more energy tied up in the rotational KE form and less energy available for translational KE, ½ m V

## 2

. This means that the V value will be smaller and the object takes longer to get down the ramp.

Q4. True

#### Copyright

Copyright© 2015 by Greg Clements. Permission is granted to reproduce this document as long as \(1\) this Copyright notice is included, \(2\) no charge of any kind is made, and \(3\) the use is for an educational purpose. Editing of the document to suit your own class style and purposes is allowed.

