# Ch 17: Sound

## Physics of Hearing

### Introduction

#### Topics

* X

#### Terms to Know

* sound, frequency, wavelength, pitch, speed, temperature, intensity, decibel, Doppler

**/LO/** **17.1. Sound**

* Define sound
* Describe sound as a longitudinal wave.

**/LO/** **17.2. Speed of Sound, Frequency, and Wavelength**

* Define pitch.
* Describe the relationship between the speed of sound, its frequency, and its wavelength.
* Describe the effects on the speed of sound as it travels through various media.
* Calculate the speed of sound in air at various temperatures.

**/LO/** **17.3. Sound Intensity and Sound Level**

* Define intensity
* Calculate sound intensity levels in decibels \(dB\).

**/LO/** **17.4. Doppler Effect and Sonic Booms**

* Define Doppler effect, Doppler shift

### 17.1 Sound

#### To Do

#### Notes

Q1. If a tree falls in the middle of a forest does it make a sound?

Sound travels as a longitudinal wave. Sound is created by some variation of the pressure at the source of the sound. The regions of air where the molecules are close together \(high pressure\) are compressions. The regions of air where the molecules are far apart \(low pressure\) are rarefactions.

Q2. Why does the intensity of sound decrease proportional to the square of the distance?

### 17.2 Speed of Sound, Frequency, and Wavelength

#### To Do

#### Notes

Again, V

## wave

= frequency \* wavelength

The speed of the molecules in the air affect the speed at which the compression of the wave is transmitted to neighboring molecules. The speed of molecules is related to the temperature of the air. Thus the speed of sound in air has the following approximate calculation:

V = 331.5 + 0.6 T m/s . \(In this chapter T is measured in Celsius temperature units!\)

What is the speed of sound at room temperature \(20

## o

Celsius\)?

We will not use the other calculations for speed given in the textbook.

We may watch a video that discusses sound.

Calculate the wavelength for a sound wave that has a frequency of 500 Hz for sound in our physics room.

Pitch is the frequency of the sound.

You should be aware that the speed of sound is larger for fluids and solids than it is for air.

### 17.3 Sound Intensity and Sound Level

#### To Do

#### Notes

I is the intensity of the wave, measured in Watts/m

## 2

I = Power / Area

The loudness of a sound is measured in decibels. β \(dB\) = 10 log

## 10

\(I / I

## o

\)

I

## o

is 1 x 10

## –12

Watts/m

## 2

Q3. Why do physicists use a logarithmic calculation for sound intensity?

### 17.4 Doppler Effect and Sonic Booms

#### To Do

#### Notes

You should be aware that if the source of sound is moving towards the observer, the observer will hear a higher pitch for the sound because the distance between the peaks of the wave has been reduced.

We may watch a video that illustrates these effects.

### 17.5 Sound Interference and Resonance: Standing Waves in Air Columns

#### To Do

#### Notes

How do noise canceling headphones work?

Standing waves can be formed in air columns that are open at one end or both ends. If the column is open at both ends the frequencies are identical to the case of the string that is anchored at both ends. Various musical instruments have standing waves in air columns.

Open tube: Open at both ends

Fundamental frequency, f

## 1

= V/\(2L\) L is the length of the tube.

Harmonics f

## n

= n \* f

## 1

n = 1,2,3,4,5,6 etc.

Closed tube: closed at one end, open at the other end

Fundamental frequency, f

## 1

= V/\(4L\) L is the length of the tube.

Harmonics f

## n

= n \* f

## 1

n = 1,3,5 etc. Note that only odd harmonics are possible.

Answers: Try to answer the questions on your own first.

Q1. Yes \(according to the physics definition of sound\). There will be a pressure wave created as the tree falls.

Q2. The energy of the wave basically spreads out into a sphere centered on the source of the sound. The area of a sphere is 4 π r

## 2

The energy per square meter decreases since the area over which the energy is distributed is increasing proportional to the square of the distance from the source.

Q3. Your ear is a logarithmic detector. This allows you to hear both soft and loud sounds. The decibel system corresponds to how we detect changes in sound intensity. By the way, your eye is a logarithmic detector of light. This allows you to see during the day and at night.

#### Copyright

Copyright© 2015 by Greg Clements. Permission is granted to reproduce this document as long as \(1\) this Copyright notice is included, \(2\) no charge of any kind is made, and \(3\) the use is for an educational purpose. Editing of the document to suit your own class style and purposes is allowed.

