# Ch 11: Fluid Statics

## Introduction

### Topics

- X

### Terms to Know

- fluid, solid, liquid, gas, density, specific gravity, pressure, force, area, depth, Pascal&#39;s Principle

**/LO/**  **11.1. What Is a Fluid?**

- State the common phases of matter.
- Explain the physical characteristics of solids, liquids, and gases.
- Describe the arrangement of atoms in solids, liquids, and gases.

**/LO/**  **11.2. Density**

- Define density.
- Calculate the mass of a reservoir from its density.
- Compare and contrast the densities of various substances.

**/LO/**  **11.3. Pressure**

- Define pressure.
- Explain the relationship between pressure and force.
- Calculate force given pressure and area.

**/LO/**  **11.4. Variation of Pressure with Depth in a Fluid**

- Define pressure in terms of weight.
- Explain the variation of pressure with depth in a fluid.
- Calculate density given pressure and altitude.

**/LO/**  **11.5. Pascal&#39;s Principle**

- Define pressure.
- State Pascal&#39;s principle.
- Understand applications of Pascal&#39;s principle.
- Derive relationships between forces in a hydraulic system.

Up to this point we have been discussing solid objects. But, the real world has systems where the bonds between neighboring atoms or molecules are weaker. Those systems are able to deform when a force is applied. We will study the nature of gases and liquids behave and their relationship to force. It will turn out to be convenient to discuss the pressure of liquids and gases for part of this chapter.

## 11.1 What Is a Fluid?

### To Do

### Notes

A fluid is a substance that flows. Liquids and gases are fluids. A liquid has a definite surface, but a gas does not have a definite surface. This chapter deals with the study of hydrostatics … fluids at rest.

Figure 11.2 in the OpenStax textbook gives you some appreciation for solids, liquids, and gases but the gas illustration should have the atoms farther from each other.

## 11.2 Density

### To Do

### Notes

How did you answer the question in the book: &quot;Which weighs more, a ton of feathers or a ton of bricks?&quot;

The density of an object is found by dividing its mass by its volume. Density, ρ = mass / volume

The standard units for density are kg/m

# 3

 . You should know how to convert density to grams / cm

# 3

 as this is often used even though it is not standard units.

Q1. Liquid water (not ice, not water vapor) has a density of 1 gram /cm

# 3

 . What is its density in standard units?

2.54 centimeters = 1 inch. Suppose you have a small box that has a length, width, and height of 1 cm. Volume for rectangular shaped objects is found by multiplying length \* width \* height. The volume of the box would be 1 cm

# 3

. Suppose you have 1 million of those boxes.

Q2. Would the million boxes fit in our class room?

Solids and liquids are nearly incompressible and thus have nearly constant density even if a compressing force acts on them. Gases have densities that vary greatly. The table in the text shows some density values. Note the power of 10 on some numbers. The &quot;solid&quot; polystyrene is essentially trapped air so its density is low compared to other solids. You should note the trend of densities for solids vs. liquids vs. gases. The main reason for the low gas densities is the increase in distance between atoms compared to the solids or liquids.

Q3. What is the mass of the air in a room that is a rectangular volume 12 m by 8 m by 3 meters?

Calculate the mass of a lead brick that has rectangular dimensions of 20 cm by 5 cm by 10 cm.

Recall ρ = mass / volume so mass = ρ \* volume

Calculate the weight in Newtons of the lead brick.

Calculate the weight in pounds for the lead brick.

Specific gravity for an object is equal to the density of the object divided by the density of water. Specific gravity simply gives us a comparison of the density of the object to the density of water.

What is the specific gravity of an object that has a density of 6.5 g/cm

# 3

 ?

## 11.3 Pressure

### To Do

### Notes

Pressure is calculated by dividing the force which acts perpendicular to an area by the value of the area.

Pressure, P = F/A 1 Newton/1 m

# 2

 is called 1 Pascal_._ Place a pen or pencil between two fingers. Press (a little). Which finger feels the most discomfort? Why?

Why do some wooden table tops have indentations created by pens and pencils?

Calculate the pressure at the bottom of the feet of an adult who has a mass of 65 kg. You will need to estimate the area of the feet that are in contact with the floor.

Calculate the pressure at the bottom of high heeled shoes assuming a 65 kg adult walks with only the heels in contact with the floor.

Why does the owner of a basketball arena that has wooden floors prefer that high heeled shoes are not worn by people who walk on the wooden floor.

The air which is above you creates a downward force on you. The value of atmospheric pressure is about 14.7 lb/in

# 2

 or about 1.013 x 10

# 5

 Pascals. Atmospheric pressure is about 1 bar, but meteorologists often report the atmospheric pressure in units of millibars. 1000 millibars is a typical atmospheric pressure value. The atmospheric pressure decreases as one moves to higher altitudes. The nature of the change is more complicated than we need to discuss in this class. The pressure decreases approximately as an exponential function of the height.

P = F/A can be transformed to read P\*A = F The force due to a gas or liquid is always perpendicular to the walls of the container.

## 11.4 Variation of Pressure with Depth in a Fluid

### To Do

### Notes

You should ask me if you have questions on how the textbook derived the relationship between pressure and the depth in a fluid. The pressure created by a fluid is easier to calculate since the density of the fluid is nearly constant. The pressure at a certain depth, h, in a fluid is found by

P = density\* g \* h.

Note that the pressure does not depend at all on the horizontal width of the container. This fact allows dams to create reservoirs that extend for miles upstream. The length of the lake created by the dam has no effect on how much pressure and force are exerted on the dam. The depth of the water at the dam controls the amount of pressure on the dam. The average pressure on the dam is the pressure at half of the maximum depth of the water. The area of the dam and the average pressure then can be used to find the force on the dam.

Q4. What is the value of the pressure at the bottom of a city water tank that has a diameter of 18 meters and is 50 meters tall?

P = density\* g \* h does not apply to gases for two reasons.

1) The variable h is supposed to be the depth below the top of the fluid. Gases do not have a top. The Earth&#39;s atmosphere just gets thinner and thinner and thinner as you move away from the Earth. The altitude of 120 km you see in the text is about the height at which meteors are seen. At this height the air is dense enough to cause significant friction with the incoming meteoroid. The friction heats up the air and the air glows to produce the observed meteor. But, I digress….

2) The density of gases is not constant as the height above the ground increases. Constant density is required over the distance h for the calculation of P = density\* g \* h.

The pressure due to our atmosphere at sea level is 1.03 x 10

# 5

 Pascals. Suppose the Earth&#39;s atmosphere had a constant density of 1.29 kg/m

# 3

 and had a top (both assumptions are very wrong). But, go ahead and calculate the height of this hypothetical atmosphere.

Apply P = density\* g \* h

1.03 x 10

# 5

 Pascals = 1.29 kg/m

# 3

 \* 9.8 m/s

# 2

 \* h h is 8147 meters or 5.1 miles! This is less than the altitude of commercial jet aircraft.

## 11.5 Pascal&#39;s Principle

Here is another statement of Pascal&#39;s Principle: The pressure applied to a confined fluid increases the pressure throughout the fluid by the same amount.

If the pressure increases by ( P ) at one point in the fluid, the pressure changes by an equal amount (P), at all points in the fluid. Pascal&#39;s principle can be used to understand the operation of a hydraulic system. In this machine an extra pressure is created at one point in the hydraulic fluid by applying a force to a small piston. This extra pressure is then present everywhere in the fluid. At some other place in the system a large piston is used to apply force to an object. The ratio of the output force to the input force is equal to the ratio of the output piston area to the input piston area. _Why? (Hint: consider the definition of pressure F/A .)_

Q5. Suppose 40 Newtons are applied to a hydraulic cylinder that has a radius of 2 cm. What force is available at another cylinder in the hydraulic system that has a radius of 8 cm?

What questions do you have on this section?

------

Answers: Try to answer the questions on your own first.

Q1. 1 gram 1 kg 100 cm 100 cm 100 cm

 ---------- \* ------ \* --------- \* --------- \* ----------- = 1.0 x 10

# 3

 kg/m

# 3

 cm

# 3

 1000 gram 1 m 1 m 1 m

Q2. Yes! There are 1 million cm

# 3

 in 1 m

# 3

 .

Q3. Mass = density \* volume or 1.29 kg/m

# 3

 \* (12 \* 8 \* 3 m

# 3

 )

 So the mass = 372 kg. The weight of the air mg = 3,641 Newtons

The weight of the air in pounds is 3,641 N \* 0.225 lb / Newton or 819 pounds!

Q4. P = 1000 kg/m

# 3

 \* 9.8 m/s

# 2

 \* 50 meters = 4.9 x 10

# 5

 Pascals

 This is about 4.84 atmospheres.

Q5. Pascal: F

# 1

 / A

# 1

 = F

# 2

 / A

# 2

 or A

# 2 \*

F

# 1

 / A

# 1

 = F

# 2

 area = π \* radius

# 2

 π \* 8

# 2

 \* 40 Newtons / π \* 2

# 2

 = Force available

 64 \* 40 / 4 = Force Force = 640 Newtons This is a machine since force was increased.

### Terms to Know

- gauge pressure, barometer, buoyancy

**/LO/**  **11.6. Gauge Pressure, Absolute Pressure, and Pressure Measurement**

- Define gauge pressure and absolute pressure.
- Understand the working of aneroid and open-tube barometers.

**/LO/**  **11.7. Archimedes&#39; Principle**

- Define buoyant force.
- State Archimedes&#39; principle.
- Understand why objects float or sink.
- Understand the relationship between density and Archimedes&#39; principle.

**/LO/**  **11.9. Pressures in the Body**

- Explain the concept of pressure the in human body.

## 11.6 Gauge Pressure, Absolute Pressure, and Pressure Measurement

### To Do

### Notes

Gauge pressure is the pressure with respect to atmospheric pressure. When you measure the pressure of air in a tire you read the gauge pressure. The instrument you use to measure the pressure of the tire is between the gas in the tire and the atmosphere. The pressure in the tire creates a force on the instrument. The atmospheric pressure creates a force in the opposite direction on the instrument. The instrument responds to the difference in the forces and displays the difference in the pressures. The true pressure is found by adding the atmospheric and gauge pressure values. Most calculations require a true (also called absolute) pressure, not a gauge pressure.

P

# TRUE

 = P

# GAUGE

- P

# ATMOSPHERE

Q1. What is the absolute pressure in a tire when the tire gauge shows a pressure of 18 lb/in

# 2

 ?

What questions do you have on the open-tube manometer ?

Describe the construction / operation of a mercury barometer. Why is the tube closed and the gas evacuated in the column where the pressure reading is recorded?

The atmospheric pressure is used to balance the pressure created by a column of mercury. As the atmospheric pressure varies the value of h for the mercury column varies. Why is water not commonly used for constructing this type of barometer?

## 11.7 Archimedes&#39; Principle

### To Do

### Notes

Suppose that an object is submerged in a fluid. _At what point on the object does the pressure have its largest value a) above the object b) on the side of the object c) at the bottom of the object?_

Since Force = Pressure \* Area, the upward force on the object due to the fluid is greater than the downward force on the object. This difference in force is the buoyant force. Archimedes&#39; Principle states that the value of the buoyant force is equal to the weight of the displaced fluid. It is true for objects of any shape. This principle applies for both liquids (people swimming, iron ships) and gases (hot air balloons, helium balloons). Buoyant Force (BF) is the best friend for swimmers!

Buoyant force = mass of displaced fluid \* g or

Buoyant force = (density of displaced fluid \* volume of displaced fluid ) \* g or

Buoyant force = (density of displaced fluid \* volume of object that is displacing fluid ) \* g

The third calculation is the one that is commonly used to solve problems.

Q2. What is the buoyant force when a 1200 gram piece of aluminum displaces 400 cm

# 3

 of sea water?

Q3. What is the apparent weight and mass of this piece of aluminum?

What is the maximum number of 70 kg students who can stand on a raft made of 10 pine boards (each board is 400 cm x 40 cm x 20 cm ) such that everyone&#39;s feet is dry? The raft is floating in fresh water (4

# o

C). Let the density of the pine board be 0.45 grams/cm

# 3

 . The solution will be given in class. You need to write an equation that shows the net force in the vertical direction is zero. The upward force is the buoyant force for the system. The downward force is the weight of the system.

_What volume of lead should be attached to the bottom of a pine board (mass = 1.2 kg) such that the board becomes totally submerged in sea water but does not continue to sink?_ Let the density of the pine board be 0.45 grams/cm

# 3

 . You need to write an equation that shows the net force in the vertical direction is zero. The upward force is the buoyant force for the system. The downward force is the weight of the system. The upward force is the result of two displacements. The wood and the lead displace sea water. The downward force is the sum of the weights of the wood and the lead.

_Why do ships made of iron not sink_? (at least when initially placed in water at the shipyard)

_Is it possible to make a canoe out of concrete?_

## 11.8 Cohesion and Adhesion in Liquids: Surface Tension and Capillary Action

**We are skipping this material.**

## 11.9 Pressures in the Body

### To Do

### Notes

It is important to monitor various pressures in the body. Why is there such a big range of pressures in the bladder?

Why is an IV bag for a patient in a hospital placed on a pole about 30 cm above the entry point of the IV? (Recall P = ρ g h )

We will not do any calculations for the material in this section.

What questions do you have on the material in this chapter?

------

Answers: Try to answer the questions on your own first.

Q1. First comment: Unless you have specially designed tires, 18 lb/in

# 2

 is too low and presents a safety issue. Check the sidewall of your tires to find the recommended gauge pressure. The air pressure in an auto tire (in 2012) is normally around 35 lb/in

# 2

. Standard atmospheric pressure is about 14.7 lb/in

# 2

 so the true pressure would be 18 + 14.7 or 32.7 lb/in

# 2

 . Let&#39;s convert this to standard units. 1 atmosphere is 1.013 x 10

# 5

 Pascals.

32.7 lb/in

# 2

 \* 1.013 x 10

# 5

 Pascals / 14.7 lb/in

# 2

 2.25 x 10

# 5

 Pascals is the true pressure

Q2. B.F. = 1,025 kg/m

# 3

 \* 400 cm

# 3

 \* ( 1 m

# 3

 / 1 x 10

# 6

 cm

# 3

 )  0.410 Newtons

Q3. The apparent weight of the iron object would be the weight measured in air – B.F.

(I am ignoring the buoyant force created by the displacement of air. Why?)

The apparent weight is :

mg – B.F. or (1.2 kg \* 9.8 m/s

# 2

 ) - 0.410 Newtons or 11.76 N - .410 N  11.35 N

Weight = mg

11.35 N = &quot;m&quot; g The apparent mass is 11.35 N / 9.8 m/s

# 2

 1.158 kg or 1,158 grams.

### Copyright

Copyright© 2015 by Greg Clements. Permission is granted to reproduce this document as long as \(1\) this Copyright notice is included, \(2\) no charge of any kind is made, and \(3\) the use is for an educational purpose. Editing of the document to suit your own class style and purposes is allowed.

# 