# Ch 15: Thermal-3

## Thermodynamics

### Introduction

#### Topics

* X

#### Terms to Know

* heat, work, internal energy, state variable, efficiency, heat engine, Carnot Cycle, cycle, isothermal, adiabatic, isochoric, isobaric, Otto Cycle

**/LO/ 15.1. The First Law of Thermodynamics**

* Define the first law of thermodynamics.
* Describe how conservation of energy relates to the first law of thermodynamics.
* Identify instances of the first law of thermodynamics working in everyday situations, including biological metabolism.
* Calculate changes in the internal energy of a system, after accounting for heat transfer and work done.

**/LO/ 15.2. The First Law of Thermodynamics and Some Simple Processes**

* Describe the processes of a simple heat engine.
* Explain the differences among the simple thermodynamic processes—isobaric, isochoric, isothermal, and adiabatic.
* Calculate total work done in a cyclical thermodynamic process.

**/LO/ 15.3. Introduction to the Second Law of Thermodynamics: Heat Engines and Their Efficiency**

* State the expressions of the second law of thermodynamics.
* Calculate the efficiency and carbon dioxide emission of a coal-fired electricity plant, using second law characteristics.
* Describe and define the Otto cycle.

**/LO/ 15.4. Carnot's Perfect Heat Engine: The Second Law of Thermodynamics Restated**

* Identify a Carnot cycle.
* Calculate maximum theoretical efficiency of a nuclear reactor.
* Explain how dissipative processes affect the ideal Carnot engine.

We will again study heat in this chapter. When there is heat there is the possibility of converting some of the moving energy into work. The study of thermodynamics became important when the industrial revolution started to use steam engines, etc.

### 15.1 The First Law of Thermodynamics

#### To Do

#### Notes

It is important to know some of the laws that govern the movement of thermal energy. Thermodynamics discusses heat, internal energy and work done by a system.

The First Law of Thermodynamics is a statement of conservation of energy.

U = Q - W Q is positive if energy enters the system W is positive if the system does work.

U is the total of the kinetic and potential energy inside the system.

U is U

## final

– U

## initial

Is it reasonable to you that if energy enters the system \(Q is positive\) that the energy in the system would tend to increase \(U is positive\)?

Is it reasonable to you that if the system does work \(positive W\) on some object \(force \* distance\) that there will tend to be less energy inside the system \(U is negative\)?

No experiments have observed a violation of this law.

Q and W are thermodynamic processes that change the values of the internal energy, pressure, temperature, volume and perhaps N. A system does not possess certain values of Q or W. A system can be characterized by the values of U, P, T, V and N. U, P, T, V and N are called state variables since they specify the state of the system. Q and W can change the state of a system. As a system changes its state the Q and W values will depend on the method \(or path\) used to change the state of the system. The value of U will not depend on some particular path. There will be many paths that can accomplish the same U.

_Q1. What is the change in the internal energy of a system in which 300 Joules enter the system and the system does 200 J of work?_

**Human Metabolism and the First Law of Thermodynamics**

Q for the body is normally a negative number since your body temperature is usually at a higher temperature than your environment. The Q and W values combine to cause a negative value for U. But, when you eat food you bring internal energy into your system and U increases.

### 15.2 The First Law of Thermodynamics and Some Simple Processes

#### To Do

#### Notes

Work in a Thermodynamic System

Work is equal to force times distance \(with force and distance parallel\).

W = F\*d or W = \( P\*Area \) \* d = P \* \( Area \*d \)

or W = P\* Volume This is only to be used if pressure is constant

In a gas system we can calculate work by multiplying a constant pressure by the change that has occurred in the volume. W is positive when a system expands.

Much of the discussion concerning thermodynamics is referenced to a P V diagram. The PV graph has pressure as a vertical variable and volume as a horizontal variable.

The state of a system is \(partially\) described by knowing the pressure, temperature, volume and number of moles of gas for the system. Some important processes which take a system of gas from one state to another are: isobaric \(constant pressure\) isochoric \(constant volume\) and isothermal \(constant temperature_\)._

Consider PV=nRT. If T and n are constant \(isothermal, closed system\) then PV = constant.

Sketch each of the three changes \(isobaric, isochoric, isothermal\) on a generalized P V diagram that you construct. Don't put any numbers on the axes, just label the vertical axis with P and the horizontal axis with V.

ISOTHERMAL PROCESS

What is the name of the curve that

represents an isothermal process?

A heat reservoir in thermal contact with a system

can maintain a constant temperature for the system.

This creates an isothermal process.

For an ideal gas: U = \( 3/2\) NkT or U = \( 3/2 \) nRT .

Consider a process that changes the state variables.

_Q2. If the temperature is constant during the process what is the value of the change in internal energy?_

U = \( 3/2 \) nRT

_Q3. How are Q and W related in an isothermal process?_

ADIABATIC PROCESS

In this process there is no energy lost or gained by the system_._

_Q4. What is the value of Q?_

_Q5. How are W and the value of the change in internal energy related?_

ISOCHORIC PROCESS

In this process the volume is constant.

_Q6. What is the value of W for this process?_

_Q7. How are Q and the value of the change in internal energy related?_

ISOBARIC PROCESS

In this process the pressure is constant.

_Q8. What is the value of W for this process?_

_Q9. How are Q, W, and the value of the change in internal energy related?_

The work done is equal to the area under a line drawn between the initial and final states of a system. The work done on or by a system depends on the type of process\(es\) which have occurred. Let's consider two processes_._

1\) Start the system at 4 liters, 3 atmospheres, 300 Kelvin .Perform an isobaric process that ends when the volume is 2 liters. Perform an isochoric process that ends at 6 atmospheres, 300 Kelvin

2\) Start the system at 4 liters, 3 atmospheres, 300 Kelvin. Perform an isothermal process that ends when the pressure is 6 atmospheres and the volume is 2 liters.

Sketch both processes on a PV graph.

Calculate the amount of work for process 1.

Calculate the amount of work for process 2.

For an isothermal process W = nRT ln\(V

## 2

/V

## 1

\)

Is your graph in agreement with the calculated values of the work done?

What questions do you have for the examples on these concepts?

Reversible Processes

Real processes are not reversible. Real systems lose energy through pathways not related to work. This lost thermal energy cannot be collected and converted into useful work. \(e.g. friction causes a loss of energy available to do work\).

### 15.3 Introduction to the Second Law of Thermodynamics: Heat Engines and Their Efficiency

#### To Do

#### Notes

The First Law of Thermodynamics does not make any statements about the direction energy will "flow" in a situation. Energy would be conserved if 3,000 J left a cold object and entered a hot object. But, we do not observe this process occur without the input of work.

The Second Law of Thermodynamics \(first expression … from Clausius\)

Heat transfer occurs spontaneously from higher- to lower-temperature bodies but never spontaneously in the reverse direction.

Name a device in a home where energy leaves a cold region and enters a warm region.

This device does not violate the Second Law because work is done to move the energy. The energy is not moving spontaneously.

The Second Law of Thermodynamics is a statement as to which processes are allowed and which processes are not allowed.

Heat Engines

Write your own summary of the key concepts for a Heat Engine.

The Second Law of Thermodynamics \(second expression\)

It is impossible in any system for heat transfer from a reservoir to completely convert to work in a cyclical process in which the system returns to

its initial state.

The development of the steam engine in the 1700's motivated the scientific study of heat engines. The builders of the early steam engines realized that the engines were very inefficient. Part of the motivation for developing the study of thermodynamics was to improve those efficiencies.

Draw a schematic diagram \(3 regions\) for a heat engine.

A heat engine converts some of the heat energy

leaving a high temperature \( T

## H

\) reservoir into work.

The energy that is not converted to work moves to

a low temperature reservoir, T

## L

.

In order to conserve energy, Q

## H

= W + Q

## C

Note that Q

## C

is taken to be positive even though it represents

the energy leaving the working part of the heat engine.

Cyclic Process When a process completes a cycle the

system has returned to the same state it was in at the

start of the cycle.

Q10. _What is the temperature of the system_

_at the end of the cycle compared to the start of the cycle?_

_Q11. What is the value of the change in internal energy for the cycle?_

_Q12. What is the relationship between_ Q

## H

, Q

## C

_, and W?_

The expansion phase of the cycle takes place because gas at high temperature has high pressure. This creates force for the expansion.

What creates the high temperature reservoir in an automobile engine?

e = W/Q

## H

_Is it possible to write the efficiency equation only using Q values?_

Use Q

## H

= Q

## C

* W to replace W and simplify the expression.

How much do you pay to fill up your car with gasoline?

If an automobile has an efficiency of 20%, how much money that you spend becomes useful work?

How much money that you spend does not become useful work in your automobile?

Here is a rhetorical question: TRUE or FALSE It is important to maximize the efficiency of heat engines.

You should become familiar with the general features of the Otto Cycle.

### 15.4 Carnot's Perfect Heat Engine: The Second Law of Thermodynamics Restated

#### To Do

#### Notes

The study of thermodynamic processes in the early 1800's showed that the maximum efficiency from a heat engine is achieved when the cycle consists of isothermal and adiabatic paths. The Carnot cycle is such a set of paths. You should become familiar with the general PV diagram for the Carnot cycle. The efficiency of a Carnot heat engine is

e

## ideal

= 1 – \(T

## C

/ T

## H

\).

Carnot Engine

Stated in terms of reversible processes, the **second law of thermodynamics** has a third form:

A Carnot engine operating between two given temperatures has the greatest possible efficiency of any heat engine operating between these two

temperatures. Furthermore, all engines employing only reversible processes have this same maximum efficiency when operating between the

same given temperatures.

_Q13. Describe a heat engine which has an efficiency of 100%._

_Q14. Describe a heat engine which has an efficiency of 0%._

Kelvin-Planck Statement of the Second Law: No device is possible whose sole effect is to transform a given amount of heat completely into work.

OR It is impossible for any system to undergo a cyclic process whose sole result is the absorption of heat from a single reservoir at a single temperature and the performance of an equivalent amount of work.

OR 100% efficiency is impossible.

Real heat engines have efficiencies less than the Carnot efficiency. This is due to energy losses such as friction.

Answers: Try to answer the questions on your own first.

Q1. U = 300 J – 200 J = 100 J

Q2. U = 0 since the temperature is constant \(T = 0\).

Q3. For an isothermal process, U is 0. So, from the First Law, Q = W.

Q4. Q = 0

Q5. From the First Law U = Q – W so U = -W

Q6. W = 0 since there is no motion.

Q7. U = Q

Q8. P V

Q9. U = Q – W

Q10. The temperatures will be the same.

Q11. Zero

Q12. Q

## H

= Q

## C

* W

Q13. T

## C

= 0

Q14. T

## C

= T

## H

#### Terms to Know

* heat pump, coefficient of performance, refrigerator, air conditioner, entropy, heat death of universe

**/LO/** **15.5. Applications of Thermodynamics: Heat Pumps and Refrigerators**

* Describe the use of heat engines in heat pumps and refrigerators.
* •Understand how a heat pump works to warm an interior space.
* Explain the differences between heat pumps and refrigerators.
* Calculate coefficient of performance for heat pumps and refrigerators.

**/LO/** **15.6. Entropy and the Second Law of Thermodynamics: Disorder and the Unavailability of Energy**

* Define entropy.
* Explain the expected fate of the universe in thermodynamic terms.
* Understand why disorder increases in real systems.

**/LO/** **15.7. Statistical Interpretation of Entropy and the Second Law of Thermodynamics: The Underlying Explanation**

* Appreciate statistical probabilities in thermodynamic systems.

### 15.5 Applications of Thermodynamics: Heat Pumps and Refrigerators

#### To Do

#### Notes

Heat pumps and refrigerators are heat engines run backward. Work is put into the device with the result that energy moves from the cold reservoir to the hot reservoir.

_Q1. For Figure 15.27, why is the net work value negative?_

Heat Pumps

The heat pump uses work to move energy from the low temperature reservoir \(outside air or ground water\) to the high temperature reservoir \(inside a home\).

Q

## C

* W = Q

## H

_Q2. Why does the outside air \(assume temperature= 0 oC\) have any energy that can be moved inside a house?_

The coefficient of performance measures the amount of energy delivered to the high temperature region relative to the work used to move the energy.

For a heat pump, the coefficient of performance is CP = Q

## H

/ W or CP = Q

## H

/ \(Q

## H

– Q

## C

\)

The maximum CP = T

## H

/ \( T

## H

– T

## C

\) \(Carnot Heat Pump\)

For the case of keeping a house warm, what advantage does a heat pump have over a furnace that burns natural gas?

Why does the CP increase when the temperature difference of the hot and cold reservoirs is reduced?

Heat pumps are expensive to install. Which location would have greater cost savings by using a heat pump and thus a shorter "pay back" time to recover the installation costs?

You should be able to make a simple diagram of a heat pump.

Air Conditioners and Refrigerators

_Q3. How does an air conditioner or refrigerator differ from a heat pump?_

The goal of an air conditioner or refrigerator is to remove energy from the cold region. The coefficient of performance, CP, for a refrigerator is

CP = Q

## C

/ W or

CP = Q

## C

/ \(Q

## H -

Q

## C

\) The maximum value for CP is T

## C

/\( T

## H

– T

## C

\) \(Carnot Refrigerator\)

You should try to determine reasonable temperatures for an ideal \(Carnot\) refrigerator that has a coefficient of performance of 13. There is more than one possible set of values for T

## C

and T

## H

.

### 15.6 Entropy and the Second Law of Thermodynamics: Disorder and the Unavailability of Energy

#### To Do

#### Notes

A reversible process is one in which the system changes from one equilibrium state to another equilibrium state by an infinitesimally small change. The system is said to always be in a state of equilibrium. An irreversible process is one in which the system was not in equilibrium at some time during the process \(e.g. the free expansion of a gas from a tank into a region which used to be a vacuum; an apple falling off of a tree\). During an irreversible process the system moves toward a less ordered state. Entropy is defined to be the state variable that changes in the following way S = Q / T for the system moving on a reversible path. For all natural processes S is either 0 or a positive number. A portion of a system may have a negative S but the remaining portion of the system will have a S that has a positive magnitude greater than the magnitude of the negative S. S is 0 for an adiabatic process. Why?

Entropy provides another statement of the Second Law: The total entropy of any system plus that of its environment increases as a result of any natural process.

OR The entropy of an isolated system increases in every natural process, and only those processes are possible for which the entropy of the system increases or remains a constant.

Heat Death of the Universe: An Overdose of Entropy

Another statement of the Second Law of Thermodynamics: Natural Processes tend to move toward a state of greater disorder

OR An isolated system in a state of relative order will always pass to a state of relative disorder until it reaches the state of maximum disorder, which is thermal equilibrium.

Theoretically, the universe is moving toward maximum disorder. When \(if\) it reaches this state, all objects will have the same temperature.

_Q4. Can work be done with a heat engine in such a universe?_

Life, Evolution, and the Second Law of Thermodynamics

Books are organized and packed with information. Books are made in a factory from raw materials that were disorganized at one point \(vat of ink, wood pulp, etc.\) An outside agent acted on the raw materials to create the book. The S for the book is negative but the S for the factory and environment is positive such that S for the universe is positive as the book is made. In order for part of system to be more organized work \(energy transfer\) has to be done on that part of the system.

### 15.7 Statistical Interpretation of Entropy and the Second Law of Thermodynamics: The Underlying Explanation

#### To Do

#### Notes

We will not do any calculations in this section but it is worth your time to read and appreciate the concepts in this section. A fair coin toss has 50% chance of being a head or tails. The textbook correctly points out that if you have 100 random coin tosses it is extremely unlikely that you will end up with a highly organized system \(i.e. 100 heads results, or 100 tails results, after 100 fair flips of the coin\).

The conclusion is that disorder is much more likely than order. Systems that start with order tend to go to disorder as time advances unless work is done to reorder the system. \(Imagine a person's room where no work was ever done to organize the room. After a month what would be the condition of the room?\)

OPTIONAL \(but interesting\) MATERIAL written by Greg Clements

We are an organized set of molecules. If you would accumulate the chemical ingredients that match your body composition and put them in a container, shake, and then open the container you would not have a copy of yourself. I realize that my "milkshake" statement about forming life is an unrealistic example. But, if evolution is defined as the creation of life from raw materials by random chance arrangement of the molecules and a progression of the arrangement of molecules to form the plants, animals and people we observe today, then I don't believe in evolution. In order to have "order" in a system that was originally disordered, outside energy has to come into a system. I believe that an outside agent, God, created life as outlined in Genesis. In my opinion, only an outside agent can bring the order and information into the world that we see today. In my opinion, God created the laws of physics \(& chemistry, biology, DNA, etc.\) and gave order and life to the universe.

Applying physics to Biblical passages, and vice versa, is not an exact science. But, it may be that the "Fall" of Adam and Eve, brought disorder into the creation as well as sin. I have no difficulty in agreeing with the scientific age of the universe, around 14 billion years. I believe that God created time as well as mass and energy. 2 Peter 3:8 "

Nevertheless, do not let this one fact escape you, beloved, that with the Lord one day is as a thousand years and a thousand years as one day." \(Amplified Bible\)

Since the previous two paragraphs represent my opinion, they will not be used as the basis of a test question for Prof. Clements' class. You are invited to visit more with me about these concepts using my contact information given at gpclements.com or physics.gpclements.com.

Answers: Try to answer the questions on your own first.

Q1. The compression takes place at a higher pressure than the expansion. The magnitude of the work of compression is greater than the magnitude of the work for the expansion. A compression process is a negative work process.

Q2. The internal energy of an ideal gas is U = \(3/2\) n R T. 0

## o

C is not 0 Kelvin, it is 273 Kelvin. The outside air contains energy that can be moved inside a home by the heat pump.

Q3. For a heat pump the region of interest \(inside the house in the winter\) is the high temperature reservoir. For a refrigerator or air conditioner the region of interest \(food location or inside the house in the summer\) is the cold reservoir.

Q4. No, the efficiency of the heat engine is 0 when the two reservoirs have the same temperature.

#### Copyright

Copyright© 2015 by Greg Clements. Permission is granted to reproduce this document as long as \(1\) this Copyright notice is included, \(2\) no charge of any kind is made, and \(3\) the use is for an educational purpose. Editing of the document to suit your own class style and purposes is allowed.

