# Ch 13: Temperature, Kinetic Theory, and the Gas Laws

### Terms to Know

- temperature, Celsius, Fahrenheit, Kelvin, kinetic energy, thermodynamics, thermal equilibrium, linear and volume expansion, ideal gas, pressure, volume, Avagadro&#39;s number, moles, gas constant, Boltzmann&#39;s constant

**/LO/**  **13.1. Temperature**

- Define temperature.
- Convert temperatures between the Celsius, Fahrenheit, and Kelvin scales.
- Define thermal equilibrium.
- State the zeroth law of thermodynamics.

**/LO/**  **13.2. Thermal Expansion of Solids and Liquids**

- Define and describe thermal expansion.
- Calculate the linear expansion of an object given its initial length, change in temperature, and coefficient of linear expansion.
- Calculate the volume expansion of an object given its initial volume, change in temperature, and coefficient of volume expansion.

**/LO/**  **13.3. The Ideal Gas Law**

- State the ideal gas law in terms of molecules and in terms of moles.
- Use the ideal gas law to calculate pressure change, temperature change, volume change, or the number of molecules or moles in a given
- volume.
- Use Avogadro&#39;s number to convert between number of molecules and number of moles.

Caution: Our textbook&#39;s use of the word &quot;heat&quot; here is not the standard use. We will use heat to describe the movement of energy due to a temperature difference.

## 13.1 Temperature

### To Do

### Notes

_Q1. TRUE or FALSE It is possible for two different people to have different views as to whether an object is hot or cold._

Hot and cold are common but very unscientific terms which are used to describe the temperature of a person or object. A thermometer is a device that makes a measurement of temperature and thus puts this quantity on a firm scientific footing.

The temperature of an object can be measured because temperature is related to the following: 1) length of a solid, 2) volume of an object or liquid or gas, 3) gas pressure, 4) electrical resistance, 5) emission of light from a solid, liquid or gas, and 6) transmission of light through a material.

To make a thermometer useful it must be calibrated. The common calibration temperatures on the Celsius scale are 0

# o

C (freezing point of water) and 100

# o

 C (boiling point of water), both at a pressure of 1 atmosphere. In the calibration process the thermometer is allowed to achieve thermal equilibrium with an object which has a temperature of one of the calibration conditions. The symbol C indicates that the Celsius temperature scale is being used. The Fahrenheit scale has values of 32

# o

 F and 212

# o

 F for the freezing and boiling points.

If one knows the Celsius temperature how can the Fahrenheit temperature be computed?

 _T_ºF =(9/5) _T_ºC + 32

Convert 37 ºC to

# o

Fahrenheit.

_Q2. TRUE or FALSE -40_

# o

 _C is the same physical temperature as -40_

# o

 _F ._

The Kelvin temperature scale is directly related to the Celsius temperature.

T

# K

 = T

# ºC

- 273.15

0 Kelvin is known as absolute zero. At this (hypothetical) temperature the KE of the center of mass of the molecules is zero.

Since expansion rates of materials are not linear, a constant-volume gas thermometer is used for precise temperature measurements. In a future section we will find that pressure, volume and temperature are related variables.

**Thermal Equilibrium** Two objects are in thermal equilibrium when they have the same temperature. Thermal equilibrium can be established by leaving objects in contact for a sufficient length of time. Thermal equilibrium can also be established when objects are not in contact (see the discussion of radiation in Chapter 14).

Q3. If two objects are in thermal equilibrium will one object gain energy while the other object looses energy?

The Zeroth Law of Thermodynamics states that two objects, each in thermal equilibrium with a third object, are in thermal equilibrium with each other.

i.e if T

# A

 = T

# C

 and T

# B

 = T

# C

 then T

# A

 = T

# B

## 13.2 Thermal Expansion of Solids and Liquids

### To Do

### Notes

When a solid experiences a rise in temperature it expands. This is due to the increased vibration (KE

# cm

 ) of the molecules. They effectively occupy more space when they are vibrating at larger amplitudes. The change in length is calculated with

L =  L

# o

T  is the coefficient of linear expansion. See the table of coefficients in the text.

What is a bimetallic strip? Which way does it bend when its temperature is increased? decreased?

_Q4. A hole is cut in an aluminum plate. What happens to the diameter of the hole when the temperature of the plate is increased?_

_Q5. Suppose that an aluminum street light pole is 40.000 meters high when the temperature is_

_-20_

# o

 _C. Find the height of the pole when the temperature is 110_

# o

 _F._

Volume Expansion of Solids and Liquids

The motion of molecules is a three-dimensional effect. Thus, objects expand in all three dimensions when the temperature of the object increases. The equation that models this expansion is

   V =  V

# o

T

 is the coefficient of volume expansion. It is approximately equal to 3 \* 

_Q6. Suppose that a 600 cm_

# 3

 _ordinary glass container is full to the brim with water. The initial temperature is 10_

# o

 _C. Describe (with a calculation) what happens when the temperature is increased to 40_

# o

 _C._

_Q7. TRUE or FALSE The best explanation as to how a mercury thermometer measures temperature is that the mercury column gets longer as the temperature increases._

Anomalous Behavior of Water Below 4

# o

C

_Q8. What is unusual about the expansion of water near 4 degrees Celsius?_

Why should you put &quot;antifreeze&quot; in the radiator of your car?

## 13.3 The Ideal Gas Law

### To Do

### Notes

What happens to the volume of a toy balloon when you press on it with both hands?

If the temperature and number of particles in a gas system are constant then Boyle&#39;s Law holds:

PV = constant It is often used as P

# 1

V

# 1

 = P

# 2

V

# 2

Q9. The pressure in a closed system is 2 atmospheres. The initial volume is 3 liters. If the volume is changed to 2 liters, while holding the temperature constant, what is the new value of the pressure?

Volume Expansion of Gases

If a gas is in a container that is flexible (i.e. the container does not have a fixed volume) then the volume of the gas will increase when the temperature is increased (given that the pressure is constant). For normal temperatures this is a linear relationship. The linear relationship does not hold when the temperature is near the vaporization temperature of the gas (i.e. when it is about to condense into a liquid). It also does not hold when the temperature reaches a level where either the molecules dissociate or the atoms become ionized. On a volume vs. temperature graph, different gases (e.g. carbon dioxide, nitrogen, oxygen …) have different slope lines but the extrapolation of the lines all intersect the temperature axis near -273

# o

 C, absolute zero.

Q10. Suppose that you have a brass rod and a sample of air in a flexible container. They have the same initial temperature. You then change the temperature of both to the same final, higher, value. Compare the amount of volume change for the two. Assume no melting, no dissociation of molecules, no change in pressure.

_Q11. TRUE or FALSE A temperature of 40_

# o

_C is twice as hot as a temperature of 20_

# o

_C._

The third temperature scale that we will use is the Kelvin temperature scale. This is an absolute temperature scale in which 0 Kelvin occurs at approximately -273 Celsius. At this temperature, absolute zero, the KE of the center of mass of a molecule is zero.

A change in temperature of 1 Kelvin is also a change of 1 degree Celsius. Only the zero point differs for these two scales. Some equations require that the temperature be expressed in Kelvin units.

Charles Law

If the pressure and number of particles in a gas system are constant then V/T = constant.

Q12. Is the T in Charles Law best measured in Fahrenheit, Celsius or Kelvins?

Gay-Lussac&#39;s Law

If the volume and number of particles are constant then P  T, or P/T = constant.

Q12. (!) Is the T in Gay-Lussac&#39;s Law best measured in Fahrenheit, Celsius or Kelvins?

**The Ideal Gas Law**

An Ideal Gas has two main characteristics: 1) there are no long range forces between the molecules, 2) the molecules occupy zero volume.

The various named gas laws previously discussed in the text are contained in the Ideal Gas Law:

P \* V = N \* k \* T

P is the true pressure in Pascals. V is the volume in m

# 3

 .

N is the number of particles in the system. k is Boltzmann&#39;s constant 1.38 x 10

# -23

 J/K.

T must be the temperature in Kelvin.

The number of moles in a pure sample can be computed by dividing the mass of the sample by the molecular weight.

_Q13. How many moles are present in 36 grams of CO_

# 2

_?_

The Ideal Gas Law can be written using the number of moles instead of the number of particles.

PV = nRT Note that T is the Kelvin temperature. n represents the number of moles of gas. P is measured in Pascals. V is measured in m

# 3

. R is the universal gas constant 8.314 J/ mole/K. The Ideal Gas Law is an equation of state. The pressure, volume, number of moles and temperature are state variables.

_Q14. Suppose that a fixed volume of gas is a closed system (number of particles remains constant). When the temperature is 30_

# o

 _C the pressure is 90000 Pa. What will the value of the pressure be if the temperature becomes 60_

# o

 _C?_

One mole of gas will occupy 22.4 liters when the Temperature is 273.15K and the pressure is 101 kPa.

What questions do you have on this material?

------

Answers: Try to answer the questions on your own first.

Q1. TRUE Hot and cold are relative terms, not data values.

Q2. TRUE Try converting to the other temperature scale.

Q3. No, unless some machine transfers energy from one object to the other object.

Q4. The diameter will increase. Imagine just drawing a circle on a flat piece of metal. As the temperature increases the metal will expand in each direction and your circle will be larger. The same expansion happens when the circle is a hole in the metal. The diameter increases.

Q5. 40.063 m. The expansion was 6.3 cm

Q6. The new volumes are 6003.78 cm

# 3

 and 600.49 cm

# 3

 . 3.29 cm

# 3

 overflows.

Q7. False The mercury volume in the reservoir increases and pushes mercury up the tube.

Q8. Water has its maximum density at this temperature. On either side of this temperature the density becomes less.

Q9. (2 atm ) \* (3 liters) = P

# 2

 \* ( 2 liters) P

# 2

 = 3 atmospheres

Q10. Use V =  V

# o

T to form a ration. The ratio of volumes is 60.7.

Q11. False You can only make ratios of temperatures if you are using the Kelvin scale.

Q12. T must be measured in Kelvins.

Q13. 36 grams / 44 grams per mole  0.82 moles

Q14.  P

# 1

 V

# 1

n

# 1

 R T

# 1

  P

# 1

 T

# 1

 ------- = --------------- ------- = ---------------

 P

# 2

 V

# 2

 n

# 2

 R T

# 2

 P

# 2

 T

# 2

Use Kelvin for the temperature 333K and 303 K

 P

# 2

 = 9.89 x 10

# 4

 Pascals

### Terms to Know

- temperature, kinetic energy, Vrms, thermal energy, Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution, phase, PV diagram, critical temperature, sublimation, triple point, humidity, Pressure Temperature diagram, evaporation

**/LO/**  **13.4. Kinetic Theory: Atomic and Molecular Explanation of Pressure and Temperature**

- Understand that collisions with a wall create Force and Pressure
- . Express the ideal gas law in terms of molecular mass and velocity.
- Define thermal energy.
- Calculate the kinetic energy of a gas molecule, given its temperature.
- Describe the relationship between the temperature of a gas and the kinetic energy of atoms and molecules.
- Describe and graph the distribution of speeds of molecules in a gas for different masses and different temperatures.
- . Understand what molecules are likely to escape the atmosphere of a planet
- . Know the source of helium for use by people on the Earth

**/LO/**  **13.5. Phase Changes**

- Interpret a phase diagram.
- Identify and describe the triple point of a gas from its phase diagram.
- Describe the state of equilibrium between a liquid and a gas, a liquid and a solid, and a gas and a solid.

**/LO/**  **13.6. Humidity, Evaporation, and Boiling**

- Explain the relationship between vapor pressure of water and the capacity of air to hold water vapor.
- Explain the relationship between relative humidity and partial pressure of water vapor in the air.
- . Understand condensation and boiling using the pressure vs. temperature diagram
- . Understand that the boiling temperature depends on pressure

## 13.4 Kinetic Theory: Atomic and Molecular Explanation of Pressure and Temperature

### To Do

### Notes

The gas in our lab room consists of a great number of particles that are moving in random motion (random directions).

Describe any forces that act on the particles of an ideal gas.

There are no long-range forces between particles for an ideal gas. But there is a force on the particle when it collides with a wall of the container. There are usually many, many particles colliding with the wall every fraction of a second. The average force of these collisions creates the pressure in the container P = F/A .

We will not discuss the derivation of the relationship of P V = (1/3) N m V

# 2

# avg

 that is shown in the text. If you have questions on the derivation please see me. This derivation will not be on homework nor on the exam.

Earlier in this chapter we saw the Ideal Gas Law: P V = N k T. We can now substitute for P v and write

(1/3) N m V

# 2

# avg

 = N k T. Now, multiply and divide the left term by 2/2 . You should recognize that can group the factors of ½ , m, and V

# 2

# avg

 . The multiplication of these three terms produces the average KE .

 (2/3 ) (1/2) N m V

# 2

# avg =

N k T or (1/2) m V

# 2

# avg

 = (3/2) k T after you cancel N, multiply by 3 on both sides and divide by 2 on both sides.

 KE

# average

 = (3/2) k T. The KE is the kinetic energy of the center of mass (CM) of the particles.

This is a very important concept. The Kelvin temperature of an Ideal Gas is directly proportional to the average KE of the center of mass of the molecules. Molecules are extended objects and possess rotational inertial. The molecules possess rotational KE and vibration PE and KE. But, the rotational and vibrational energies do not affect the temperature of the gas. Only KE

# CM

 is related to the temperature.

Q1. What does temperature measure?

KE

# average

 is called the thermal energy.

Q2. A nitrogen molecule has a mass of 28 grams per mole. Hydrogen has a mass of 1 gram per mole. Suppose a container has a mixture of 50% nitrogen and 50% hydrogen. The gases have been in the container a long time and have the same temperature as the container. TRUE or FALSE The KE of the nitrogen is 28 times larger than the KE of the hydrogen.

(1/2) m V

# 2

# avg

 = (3/2) k T can be solved for the velocity. When this is done you have a formula for V

# rms

 , the root-mean-square velocity.

V

# rms

 = square root ( 3 k T / m ) m is the mass of one particle, not the mass of a system of particles.

k = 1.3807 x 10

# -23

 J/Kelvin

The gas molecules in any sample of gas above 0 Kelvin have a distribution of speeds from near 0 m/s up to very large values. A characteristic velocity of a gas is its root-mean-square speed,

Calculate the rms velocity for a carbon dioxide molecule in this classroom.

Calculate the rms velocity for a nitrogen molecule in this classroom.

Q3. TRUE or FALSE The V

# rms

 value determines the speed of the wind in our atmosphere.

Why do molecules travel a short distance in our atmosphere before a collision occurs?

File the fact that the V

# rms

is related to the speed of sound in the back of your mind. We will revisit this when we discuss the speed of sound.

We may watch a video that illustrates these principles.

Distribution of Molecular Speeds

You should be able to sketch the approximate shape of the Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution of molecular speeds. You should be able to label the approximate locations of the most probable velocity and V

# rms

. This curve is not symmetrical. There are a few molecules that travel at speeds several times the value of V

# rms

 .

You should be able to sketch the approximate shape of the Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution for two molecules that have different masses and for one molecule with different temperature values. The calculation V

# rms

 = square root ( 3 k T / m ) should give you some clues on how to construct the graphs.

You should read the example on escape velocity and velocity of helium in the Earth&#39;s atmosphere. What is the general characteristic for molecules that are NOT found in the Earth&#39;s atmosphere (they have escaped).

Q4. TRUE or FALSE Most of the supply of helium (for balloons, science work, etc.) comes from extracting helium from our atmosphere.

Optional:

[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Helium](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Helium)

[http://news.wustl.edu/news/Pages/10754.aspx](http://news.wustl.edu/news/Pages/10754.aspx)

[http://www.universetoday.com/75719/where-is-helium-found/](http://www.universetoday.com/75719/where-is-helium-found/)

Why does the Moon not have an atmosphere?

Optional: Try the Atmospheric Retention simulation program that was written at UNL

[http://astro.unl.edu/naap/atmosphere/animations/gasRetentionPlot.html](http://astro.unl.edu/naap/atmosphere/animations/gasRetentionPlot.html)

Search for Nebraska Applet Project if the above link does not work.

## 13.5 Phase Changes

### To Do

### Notes

Water exits on Earth in solid, liquid, and gas form. This occurs because water&#39;s freezing and boiling temperatures are accessible to our view. We can experience freezing temperatures in the winter and we can create the temperature for boiling on a stove. Other molecules have &quot;freezing&quot; and &quot;boiling&quot; temperatures also but they may not be temperatures that are in our common range of experience.

Why does the volume of a gas rapidly go to zero as it is cooled? (See the graph in the textbook.)

You should know that gases can also be changed to a liquid by raising the pressure (if the temperature is not too high…more on this later).

_PV_ Diagrams

The pressure volume diagrams are worth a thousand words, or more. These diagrams give a visual image of important concepts regarding the state of a gas system.

The different lines on the PV diagrams in the textbook have different temperatures.

Q5. The density of the core of the Sun is computed to be around 160 g/cm

# 3

 . Compare this to the density of lead, 11 g/cm

# 3

. The center of the Sun is better described as a gas than a solid or liquid. Why is this true?

By 1845 all but 6 major gases had been liquefied. It was not until the later 1800&#39;s that physicists realized that these 6 gases must be cooled below their critical temperatures before they can be liquefied. Ref: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Liquid\_oxygen

What is sublimation?

Why do &quot;moth balls&quot; not form a pool of liquid as the tablet disappears?

Optional: [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mothball](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mothball)

Examine the Pressure vs. Temperature graph for water. Why do we experience all three phases (solid, liquid, and gas) for water on the Earth?

The surface pressure on Mars is about 0.01 atmospheres.

Optional Ref: [http://www.astronomynotes.com/solarsys/s10.htm](http://www.astronomynotes.com/solarsys/s10.htm)

Is it possible for water to exist in the liquid state on Mars (if you just consider pressure)?

Q6. A system of &quot;water&quot; has pressure and temperature values such that it is at the Triple Point with ice, water, and water vapor all present. TRUE or FALSE If the pressure and temperature remain constant the system will eventually become all ice.

## 13.6 Humidity, Evaporation, and Boiling

### To Do

### Notes

 &quot;Humidity&quot; (actually relative humidity) is the ratio of how much water vapor is in the air divided by how much water vapor the air can hold (without raining). A humidity condition of 100% leads to dew or rain. As the temperature of air increases it can hold more water vapor. During the day the humidity value usually decreases. Dew commonly forms just before sunrise in the summer, when the temperature has reached its lowest value for the day.

We will not do any calculations in this section. Instead I want you to use the Pressure vs. Temperature graph we saw earlier to understand why water vapor becomes liquid (dew) when the temperature decreases and why liquid water becomes water vapor (boils) when the temperature increases. Keep the pressure at 1 atmosphere and look what happens to the phase of the water as the temperature changes.

Use the Pressure vs. Temperature graph to tell me why the boiling temperature for water is lower in Denver than in Fremont, and how this affects the cooking time for foods that require boiling water. Also, why is cooking time reduced when using a pressure cooker (safely)? A standard pressure cooker has a pressure in the interior of 2 atmospheres.

Evaporation

Why is sweating part of the body&#39;s mechanism to cool off your body?

The sweat forms a layer of liquid on your skin. This liquid has an average KE. Which molecules of the liquid are more likely to escape….high velocity molecules or low velocity molecules?

After the high velocity molecules escape from the liquid what is the change in the average KE of the liquid? What is the change in the temperature of the liquid?

What questions do you have on this material?

------

Answers: Try to answer the questions on your own first.

Q1. KE of the center of mass.

Q2. False. KE = (3/2) k T The KE only depends on the temperature. All types of molecules in one container (at the same temperature) will have the same KE.

Q3. False Convert the V

# rms

miles per hour and you will see that it is not a typical speed for wind. V

# rms

 is the microscopic velocity of the particles. Wind is a bulk motion of a block of air. It does turn out that on the nights when there is less wind the temperature is somewhat smaller and on the nights when there is more wind the temperature is somewhat larger. The mass motion of air does increase the KE of the air but the wind speed is much smaller than the V

# rms

. Also, the velocities of the molecules have random directions. Even when the wind is from the North, there are many, many molecules with individual velocities toward the East, South, West, up, down, etc.

Q4. False Helium is almost nonexistent in our atmosphere. But helium can be trapped underground along with natural gas deposits. Helium is recovered from natural gas wells. If you stay in the course for the second semester you will discover that one common form of natural radioactive decay produces helium.

Q5. The temperature at the center of the Sun is computed to be over 10 million Kelvin. This is far above the critical temperature. The particles in the core of the Sun move too fast to have significant forces between them to create liquid or solid material.

Q6. False At the Triple Point all phases are in equilibrium. The amount of material in each phase is constant.

### Copyright

Copyright© 2015 by Greg Clements. Permission is granted to reproduce this document as long as \(1\) this Copyright notice is included, \(2\) no charge of any kind is made, and \(3\) the use is for an educational purpose. Editing of the document to suit your own class style and purposes is allowed.

# 