# Ch 14: Heat and Heat Transfer Methods

## Introduction

### Topics

- X

### Terms to Know

- heat, temperature, specific heat, calorimeter, calorimetry, energy, latent heat, freezing, boiling

**/LO/**  **14.1. Heat**

- Define heat as transfer of energy.
- . Understand the importance of conservation of energy principles

**/LO/**  **14.2. Temperature Change and Specific Capacity**

- Observe heat transfer and change in temperature and mass.
- Calculate final temperature after heat transfer between two objects when the system does not change phase.

**/LO/**  **14.3. Phase Change and Latent Heat**

- Examine heat transfer when the system is changing phase.
- Calculate final temperature from heat transfer for latent heat situations.

## 14.1 Heat

### To Do

### Notes

Our textbook uses the word &quot;heat&quot; in the accepted manner in this chapter.

Q1. What does &quot;spontaneous&quot; mean?

What can one physics calorie accomplish for one gram of water at 14.5

# o

C?

Q2. How does a food &quot;calorie&quot; differ from a physics calorie?

Mechanical Equivalent of Heat

Q3. Why is the standard energy unit named the &quot;Joule?&quot;

Q4. TRUE of FALSE The temperature of a system will always change when energy is added to or subtracted from a system.

## 14.2 Temperature Change and Heat Capacity

### To Do

### Notes

Q is used to represent the amount of energy entering or leaving a system.

You should convince yourself that Figure 14.4 is explained correctly in the textbook (it is).

If the system is not changing phase, the change in temperature is calculated using _Q_ = _mc_Δ_T_ . Q is the amount of energy entering or leaving a system. m is the amount of the mass in the system. c is the Specific Heat value for the material. The **specific heat** of an object measures how the temperature of a given substance responds to the addition or removal of thermal energy. There is a table of specific heats in the textbook.

ΔT is the temperature change. You must be careful to use consistent units that match what is given for the specific heat (i.e. Joules and Kg, or, kilocalories and kilograms; The temperature change may be in units of Kelvin or

# o

C.).

You should work through the examples in this section. These problems are sometimes called &quot;calorimetry&quot; problems. The underlying principle is conservation of energy. The energy in or out of the system has the effect of changing temperature (as long as the phase of the system is not changing).

You should take note of another special property of water that the text describes. Water has a large specific heat value compared to other materials.

The metric unit for heat is the Joule, but we will sometimes use the kilocalorie. 1 kcal = 4186 Joules. A kilocalorie is the energy required to raise the temperature of 1 kg of water by 1

# o

 C (when the water is at 14

# o

 C). The English standard of heat is the BTU. One BTU will raise the temperature of 1 pound of water by 1

# o

 F.

Distinction Between Temperature, Heat, and Internal Energy

An object is made up of atoms and molecules. These vibrate, rotate and move at rates that are related to the temperature of an object. The sum of the potential and kinetic energies in an object is called the internal energy. Heat is the amount of internal energy flowing from a body at a higher temperature to a body at a lower temperature. Heat is **not** a description of the temperature of an object.

REVIEW:

What does temperature measure?

What does internal energy refer to?

What does heat refer to?

Calculate the temperature change that occurs when the thermal energy of a 150 gram aluminum object is decreased by 300 Joules.

Suppose your thumb has a mass of 150 grams. Calculate the temperature change that occurs when the thermal energy in your thumb is decreased by 300 Joules.

Comment on the benefit of a relatively high value of specific heat for the human body.

A calorimeter is a device in which objects are allowed to come to thermal equilibrium with no transfer of energy from the room. The amount of thermal energy lost by the hot object(s) will equal the amount of thermal energy gained by the colder object(s). Suppose that the inner cup of a calorimeter is aluminum and has a mass of 50 grams. It contains 30 grams of water that has a temperature of 20

# o

C.

What is the temperature of the aluminum cup?

Later, a 50 gram iron object at 80

# o

C is placed in the inner calorimeter cup. What is the final temperature of the system? Conservation of energy is used to solve this problem. The hotter object loses energy. The cooler object gains energy. The objects have the same final temperature.

## 14.3 Phase Change and Latent Heat

### To Do

### Notes

Q5. What are the states (or phases) of matter?

Q6. What can cause a change in the state of matter?

During a phase change (e.g. ice melting) the temperature of the object will be constant even though energy is entering or leaving the object. The equation Q = m c T cannot be used by itself if the T range includes a phase change. e.g. water T

# start

 = 20

# o

 C T

# final

 = -5

# o

 C. Q = m c T becomes illegal across a phase change because 1) energy is used to change the phase, and 2) the value of the specific heat is different for different phases of the material.

The energy required to change the phase of a substance is called the **latent heat**. The latent heat of fusion refers to the energy per kg required to melt or freeze a substance. The latent heat of fusion for water is 3.34 x 10

# 5

 J/kg or 79.8 kcal/kg. The latent heat of vaporization refers to the energy per kg required to vaporize or condense a substance. The latent heat of vaporization for water at 100

# o

 C is 22.56 x 10

# 5

 J/kg or 539 kcal/kg. The table in this section gives values for the latent heat, L, and the temperature at which the phase change occurs.

Q = m L is used to calculate the energy associated with a phase change. Be careful that the mass has the same units as specified for the latent heat, L.

Why is the plateau for boiling so much longer than the plateau for melting in Figure 14.8?

Describe (with a calculation) what happens when 5000 Joules are added to 20 grams of water that has an initial temperature of 80

# o

C.

Suppose that a 40 gram aluminum calorimeter cup contains 20 grams of ice at a temperature of

-10

# o

C. A 200 gram lead object having a temperature of 110

# o

C is placed in the cup. Ice has a specific heat of 2100 J/kg/

# o

C. Find the equilibrium temperature. Find the amount of ice or water or both at this time.

You should understand sublimation.

------

Answers: Try to answer the questions on your own first.

Q1. The energy moves as a natural consequence of the temperature difference. No human or machine action is needed to move the energy.

Q2. A food &quot;calorie&quot; is equivalent to 1000 physics calories.

Q3. Prof. Joule performed experiments on energy and heat in the 1800&#39;s. The energy unit is named in his honor.

Q4. FALSE When energy is put into a system or extracted from a system then the systemchanges phase. But, at these phase change situation the temperature remains constant.

Q5. Solid, liquid, gas, plasma (ionized gas)

Q6. Putting energy into a system or extracting energy from a system may cause a change of phase. The system will change phase at different temperatures depending on the material.

### Terms to Know

- conduction, convection, radiation, R-factor, insulator, conductor

**/LO/** 14.4. Heat Transfer Methods

- Discuss the different methods of heat transfer.

**/LO/** 14.5. Conduction

- Calculate thermal conductivity.
- Observe conduction of heat in collisions.
- Study thermal conductivities of common substances.

**/LO/** 14.6. Convection

- Discuss the method of heat transfer by convection.

**/LO/** 14.7. Radiation

- Discuss heat transfer by radiation.

## 14.4 Heat Transfer Methods

### To Do

### Notes

Heat is the transfer of energy due to temperature difference.

In the subject of calorimetry we said that hot objects lose energy and cooler objects gain energy. This section discusses the process of energy transfer. It is important to understand how energy moves between locations that have different temperatures. Energy may move through the methods of 1) conduction (contact), 2) convection (mass motion of a fluid), and 3) radiation (light).

We may watch a video clip that illustrates these three energy transfer methods.

## 14.5 Conduction

### To Do

### Notes

Conduction is the transfer of thermal energy through the process of collisions between neighboring atoms or molecules. In conduction there is no mass transport of the material. The kinetic energy of motion is transferred from neighbor to neighbor each time a collision occurs. Suppose that you must stir spaghetti that is in boiling water. Which tool would be most comfortable: a wooden spoon or a metal spoon? Why?

Conductors allow energy to be transferred &quot;easily&quot; from one side of the conductor to the other side. Insulators don&#39;t allow energy to be transferred easily.

Q1. What are the factor(s) that, if increased, will increase the amount of energy moving through the wall?

Q2. What are the factor(s) that, if increased, will decrease the amount of energy moving through the wall?

Energy calculation for conduction:

Q k A (T

# 1

 – T

# 2

)

---- = -------------------         There is a table of k (conductivity) values in the chapter. A is area.

t thickness                In this chapter k is no longer Boltzmann&#39;s constant. T is in Kelvins.

```
                            t is the time in seconds.
```

Objects that conduct energy well are also good electrical conductors. Conductors have electrons that are free to move throughout the object. Insulators have electrons that are tightly bound to their atoms. Q results from the transfer of energy by the electrons in the material. Electrical current is the motion of electrons through a material.

Estimate the Q by conduction for the wall of a classroom. The wall has three parts: 1) concrete blocks, 2) glass windows, 3) metal trim around the windows. Make some measurements that help you understand areas and thicknesses of the components of the wall.

R Factor: The insulating ability of materials is usually stated by giving the R Factor for the material. R = thickness/ thermal conductivity R = d / k

Suppose we live in a castle that has brick walls (k = 0.84 J/s/m/

# o

 C) that are 10 feet thick. Calculate the thickness of Styrofoam that would produce the same R Factor as the brick wall.

Calculate the thickness of a glass window (k = 0.84 J/s/m/

# o

 C) with the same R Factor value.

## 14.6 Convection

### To Do

### Notes

When convection occurs there is mass motion of the material. The thermal energy is moved to a new location because the hot material itself moves to a new location.

Q3. Why is convection important for liquids and gases, but not solids?

Convection is the least understood of the three energy transfer mechanisms. There are two difficulties in accurately describing convection: 1) as the hot material moves it loses energy to the surroundings, 2) there is usually some amount of turbulence in the motion and exchange of mass between the hotter and cooler substances.

Convection occurs naturally in fluids when there is a large temperature difference between two locations. Transfer of energy by convection can be increased by blowing ( or pumping, etc.) air (or water, etc.) such as is done in a common home heating installation (forced convection).

Why does a thunderstorm cloud rise while rain is falling?

## 14.7 Radiation

### To Do

### Notes

Radiation is the transfer of thermal energy by light (electromagnetic waves). The term radiation in this chapter is not the same term used in discussing radioactivity. All objects (with T \&gt; 0 Kelvin) emit light. Light carries energy from the emitting object to the absorbing object.

Light is called electromagnetic energy. As will be studied 2

# nd

 semester, light can be described as a combination of electric and magnetic fields. The electromagnetic spectrum has named regions associated with the energy of the light … gamma rays, X-rays, ultraviolet, visible, infrared, microwave, and radio. Gamma rays are the most energetic and have the shortest wavelength. Radio is the least energetic and has the longest wavelength.

For an ideal radiator there is a certain color or wavelength region at which most of the energy is emitted. At the temperature of the human body, most of the emitted radiation is in the infrared portion of the electromagnetic spectrum. The temperature of the Sun causes it to emit most of its light in the visible portion of the electromagnetic spectrum. For stars hotter than the Sun most of the light is emitted at the blue or ultraviolet wavelengths. Material falling into a black hole emits x-rays

Figure 14.24 shows that as the temperature increases, the peak of the curve on the graph of energy vs. wavelength shifts towards shorter wavelengths. An object at 3000 Kelvin will appear to be &quot;red hot&quot; to our eyes. The object is emitting significant amounts of infrared light (that we can&#39;t see) and also some red light in the visible portion of the spectrum. An object at 6000 Kelvin will appear &quot;white hot&quot; as it is emitting significant energy at every color in the visible wavelength range.

Figure 14.24 also shows that as the temperature increases, the object emits more energy at every wavelength. The total energy emitted per second is strongly dependent on the Temperature.

The total energy emitted per second can be calculated with the Stefan-Boltzmann Law:

Q/t =  e A T

# 4

```
                            t is the time interval in seconds, A = surface area, m
```

# 2

```
  T = Temperature in Kelvins
```

= 5.67 x 10

# -8

 W/m

# 2

/K

# 4

is Stefan&#39;s constant

e = emissivity, values range from 0 to 1 depending on the material. e is about 1 for black surfaces and about 0 for shiny metal surfaces. In the units…. W = watts, m = meters, K = Kelvin. You should check to see that the units on the right side of the Q/t calculation ( e A T

# 4

) simplify to Joules/second .

We briefly talked about the units of energy / second (Joules/second) in the chapter on Work. You may remember that 1 Joule / 1 second = 1 Watt

Objects absorb radiation and emit radiation. Q is positive if energy enters the object.

The net Q is given by

 Q

# net

/t =  e A ( T

# 4

# surroundings

#

- T

# 4

# object

 )

Q4. How does a Thermos bottle minimize Q?

The equilibrium temperature of a planet depends on

a) its distance from the Sun (this controls how much solar energy is available in each m

# 2

 at the top of the planet&#39;s atmosphere,

b) how much sunlight is reflected without being absorbed

c) how much energy the planet emits to space.

Sunlight is reflected by clouds, ice, snow, etc. on the Earth. About 30% of the sunlight reaching the top of the Earth&#39;s atmosphere is reflected, not absorbed. [http://earthobservatory.nasa.gov/Features/Clouds/](http://earthobservatory.nasa.gov/Features/Clouds/)

The temperature of the Earth causes the Earth to emit primarily in the infrared portion of the electromagnetic spectrum. The amount of energy the Earth emits to space changes based on the transparency of our atmosphere to infrared light. In January you will experience the coldest nights when the skies are clear. &quot;Clear and cold&quot; is the forecast you will hear. When the skies are clear the infrared energy can more easily get out to space. Since the Earth is sending out energy it cools down. When the sky has clouds more infrared light is absorbed re-radiated back down to the Earth.

On a global basis, the Earth will emit the same amount of energy as it absorbs when the temperature of Earth is constant. If something (greenhouse gases) limits how much infrared light gets out into space then the temperature of the Earth will increase and the Earth will emit more energy (recall Q/t =  e A T

# 4

) . The greenhouse gases will still prevent a certain % of the infrared energy from reaching space. But, eventually the temperature of the Earth will reach the point that the energy emitted by Earth and reaching space equals the energy absorbed on Earth from sunlight.

The energy balance of the Earth is very complicated (more clouds from higher global temperature leads to more reflected sunlight, less ice on Earth leads to less % reflected sunlight, higher ocean temperatures cause more carbon dioxide to be released from the water, melted permafrost in the arctic could release greenhouse gases more potent than carbon dioxide, etc.) Most scientists are concerned about greenhouse gases but there is not total agreement on the level of concern that should be attached to greenhouse gases. Astronomers can discuss Venus as an example of an out-of-control greenhouse situation. Venus is about the same size and mass as the Earth but has a constant surface temperature of around 800

# o

F due to the greenhouse gases in its atmosphere. Astronomers believe the Earth does not have an out-of-control greenhouse (yet) because the Earth has an abundance of liquid water and Venus lacks liquid water. Liquid water helps to remove carbon dioxide from the atmosphere and deposit it in rocks (limestone).



Why does the earth have an average surface temperature of about 59

# o

F?

Earth currently has a moderate greenhouse effect that raises the global temperature by about 50

# o

F or 60

# o

F. If there was no greenhouse effect the global temperature would be around 5

# o

F . A moderate greenhouse effect is beneficial for life as we know it.

[http://climate.nasa.gov/TemperatureQuiz/quiz\_template.html](http://climate.nasa.gov/TemperatureQuiz/quiz_template.html)

[http://earthobservatory.nasa.gov/Features/GlobalWarming/page5.php](http://earthobservatory.nasa.gov/Features/GlobalWarming/page5.php)

------

Answers: Try to answer the questions on your own first.

Q1. Q is larger if a) the conductivity is higher, b) the wall has a larger area, c) the temperature difference is larger, d) the time interval is larger.

Q2. Q is smaller if the wall is thicker.

Q3. To have mass motion of the hot material the material must be a gas or a liquid. When you increase the temperature of one end of a metal rod (without melting the rod) the atoms at that end have more KE but the atoms themselves are locked by bonds to each other and do not move to the other end of the rod. If you start a fire, the hot air right above the flame is less dense and rises. This packet of air takes high KE with it and delivers that KE to the air some distance above the flame.

Q4. As you will see in lab, a thermos bottle has a shiny coating to reduce energy transfer by radiation. It also has a double glass wall with a vacuum between the glass layers. This reduces conduction.

(Suppose you were a 9 year old student taking a field trip and had to take your lunch. What might happen if you put cold liquid Pepsi into a thermos bottle for your lunch drink? The field trip involves a bumpy bus ride. The thermos bottle has a tight lid. ….. The CO

# 2

 gas will come out of the Pepsi liquid during this ride and create enough pressure to break the glass in the thermos bottle. …. This was a personal experience for Prof. Clements, before the era of pop in plastic bottles or aluminum cans.)

### Copyright

Copyright© 2015 by Greg Clements. Permission is granted to reproduce this document as long as \(1\) this Copyright notice is included, \(2\) no charge of any kind is made, and \(3\) the use is for an educational purpose. Editing of the document to suit your own class style and purposes is allowed.

# 