# Ch 16: Oscillatory Motion and Waves

## Introduction

### Topics

- X

### Terms to Know

- oscillation, wave, displacement, amplitude, velocity, acceleration, force, force constant, simple harmonic oscillator, frequency, period

**/LO/**  **16.1. Hooke&#39;s Law: Stress and Strain Revisited**

- Explain Newton&#39;s third law of motion with respect to stress and deformation.
- Describe the restoration of force and displacement.
- Calculate the energy in Hooke&#39;s Law of deformation, and the stored energy in a string.

**/LO/**  **16.2. Period and Frequency in Oscillations**

- Observe the vibrations of a guitar string.
- Determine the frequency of oscillations.

**/LO/**  **16.3. Simple Harmonic Motion: A Special Periodic Motion**

- Describe a simple harmonic oscillator.
- Explain the link between simple harmonic motion and waves.

Q1. How does an oscillation differ from a wave?

Q2. What do oscillations and waves have in common?

## 16.1 Hooke&#39;s Law: Stress and Strain Revisited

### To Do

### Notes

You should review the material on F = -k X .

Why are F and X in opposite directions?

Energy in Hooke&#39;s Law of Deformation

Q3. Why is the work done in stretching a spring calculated with (½)kX

# 2

 rather than with

force \* distance?

Calculate the energy stored in a spring that has been stretched 6 cm. The force constant for the spring is 844 N/m.

## 16.2 Period and Frequency in Oscillations

### To Do

### Notes

Define these terms in your own words

 period

 frequency

What are the units used for frequency?

Frequency (f) and period (T) are related by f = 1 / T NOTE: T in this chapter is NOT temperature.

Q4. Radio Waves from KHUB have a frequency of 1340 kiloHertz. What is the length of time between successive oscillations for this radio wave?

## 16.3 Simple Harmonic Motion: A Special Periodic Motion

### To Do

### Notes

Many motions are periodic (spin of the earth, earth&#39;s orbit around the sun, the motion of a second hand on a clock, etc.) Some periodic motions have additional characteristics that allow them to be called Simple Harmonic Motion ( SHM).

In mechanical systems the motion is SHM if the magnitude of the restoring acceleration is proportional to the displacement. A spring satisfies this requirement **F** = -k **X** so **a** = -(k/m) **X**

Write in definitions for

 displacement

 amplitude

Can we use the four kinematic equations to analyze SHM? Explain.

Objects on a spring undergo simple harmonic motion. Most motions that have small amplitude can be approximated as simple harmonic motion.

The period for an object in simple harmonic motion only depends on the values of the mass that is moving and the spring constant. T = 2π sqrt(m/k)

  m should be in kilograms, k (the force constant) should have units of Newtons / meter

Calculate the period and frequency for a 0.15 kg mass on a spring that has a force constant of 420 N/m .

A vertical spring is anchored to a ceiling and has a 200 gram mass attached to the bottom end of the spring. TRUE or FALSE If the amplitude of the motion is made larger then the period of the simple harmonic motion will be greater.

The Link between Simple Harmonic Motion and Waves

You should look carefully at 16.11. The paper is moving past the oscillating spring. The curve on the paper is the shape of a wave. The paper is traveling to the right. A wave will move in the same way.

The displacement, velocity, and acceleration of the object on the end of a spring can be found from the following equations:

_Form A: x_(_t_) = _X_

# max

cos(2_π__t/ T) V_(_t_) = −_X_

# max

 _sqrt( k/ m)_ sin(2_π__t/ T) a_(_t_) = −_k X_

# max

_m_ cos(2π_t/ T)_

_or_

_Form B: x_(_t_) = _X_

# max

cos(2_π__t/ T) V_(_t_) = −_V_

# max

 sin(2_π__t/ T) a_(_t_) = −a

# max

 cos(2π_t/ T)_

Let t = 0 and simplify the Form B equations. Write down the values of the displacement, velocity, and acceleration.

X                        V                                        a

Let t have a value such that (2 πt/ T) is equal to π/2 .

Q5. What is the value of t in terms of T that accomplishes this?

```
                                                    a) t = T b) t = T/2 c) t = T/4 d) t = T/8
```

For the case of (2 πt/ T) = π/2 simplify the Form B equations. Write down the values of the displacement, velocity, and acceleration.

X                        V                                        a

 Do your results agree with the graphs shown in Figure 16.12?

Be sure to have your calculator in Radian mode when you use these equations for homework and test problems.

Here is a question to ponder: A rectangular piece of wood is floating in fresh water. A small, soft, lump of mud falls straight down on top of the wood, above the center of gravity of the wood, and remains on the wood. The wood never goes completely under the water. Why is the up and down motion of the wood properly labeled simple harmonic motion? (Ignore friction effects of the water on the wood.)

------

Answers: Try to answer the questions on your own first.

Q1. An oscillation is repeated motion between two points. A wave travels away from a source.

Q2. They both have energy. They both have repeated motion.

Q3. The force is not constant for the spring as X changes so multiplying the starting or ending force by the whole distance of motion would be incorrect. Energy methods can be used to calculate the work. (1/2)k X

# 2

 is the potential energy the spring acquires by stretching or compressing a distance X. Or, use the concept that work is the area under the curve of F = -kX.

Q4. T = 1/f = 1 / (1340 \* 10

# 3

 Hz) = 7.46 \* 10

# -7

 seconds

Q5. c) t = T/4 is the correct choice. You should make this substitution for t to verify the answer.

### Terms to Know

- pendulum, kinetic energy, potential energy, uniform circular motion, damped harmonic motion

**/LO/** 16.4. The Simple Pendulum

- Measure acceleration due to gravity.

**/LO/** 16.5. Energy and the Simple Harmonic Oscillator

- Determine the maximum speed of an oscillating system.

**/LO/** 16.6. Uniform Circular Motion and Simple Harmonic Motion

- Compare simple harmonic motion with uniform circular motion.

**/LO/** 16.7. Damped Harmonic Motion

- Observe amplitude of a damped harmonic oscillator.

Section 4 The Simple Pendulum

A simple pendulum has a small mass (small in size) on the end of a massless string. When the pendulum is not hanging straight down there is a restoring force due to a component of the weight, mg. The textbook shows you that the pendulum motion can be considered to be simple harmonic motion if the angle of the pendulum to the left or right of vertical is less than 15 degrees (this is about 0.26 radians). You should put your calculator in radian mode and do a numerical experiment to verify sin _θ_≈ _θ_ . i.e. Calculate sin(.01), sin(.05), sin (.1), sin(.15), sin(.2), sin(.25). If the angle of swing is less than 15 degrees then the following relationship for the period is nearly true:

  T = 2π sqrt( L/g)

Q1. What is the period of a simple pendulum that has a length of 9.8 meters?

On a certain hypothetical planet an astronaut sets up a pendulum that has a length of 2 meters. She records that the pendulum has a frequency of 0.3 Hz. _What is the value of the local acceleration due to gravity?_

Q2. TRUE or FALSE A pendulum could be used to determine the altitude of an aircraft.

For the &quot;Check Your Understanding&quot; section I have a slight disagreement with the textbook regarding the pendulums that have 10 kg and 100 kg masses, 2 cm off the floor. Most 100 kg masses are taller than 10 kg masses. So, the center of mass of the 100 kg object would be higher than the center of mass of the 10 kg object. The length of the pendulum is measured from the top support point to the center of mass of the object at the bottom of the string. The length of the 100 kg pendulum will be slightly less than the length of the 10 kg pendulum, since both masses are 2 cm above the floor. The book&#39;s point is correct though, the mass of the pendulum does not affect the period.

## 16.5 Energy and the Simple Harmonic Oscillator

### To Do

### Notes

A system undergoing simple harmonic motion has both potential and kinetic energy. At one point in the cycle all the energy is KE. Later, all the energy is PE.

If the motion is not damped (no energy is lost during each cycle),  KE + PE = constant.

½ m V

# 2

- ½ k A

# 2

 = Total Energy, E

E is proportional to A

# 2

We will not use most of the equations that are in the textbook.

For a spring: _What is the maximum velocity if k = 20 N/m, A = 5 cm and m = 3 kg?_

## 16.6 Uniform Circular Motion and Simple Harmonic Motion

### To Do

### Notes

You should look at the drawing in the text that shows the shadow of an object that is moving with uniform circular motion. The velocity and acceleration of the shadow shows the component of the velocity and acceleration for the object moving around the circle. The shadow does satisfy the requirements for simple harmonic motion.

The period of the motion is equal to the circumference of the circle divided by the velocity for the object moving on the circle. The period for the circular motion is the same as the period for simple harmonic motion.

## 16.7 Damped Harmonic Motion

### To Do

### Notes

What happens to the amplitude of a system that is losing energy?

What could cause this loss of energy?

You should be aware of the graph that shows the decrease of amplitude for the motion when damping is present.

We will not do any calculations for this section.

We will not discuss critically damped or overdamped.

------

Answers: Try to answer the questions on your own first.

Q1. T = 2π since L and g have the same numeric value they divide to 1 inside the square root.

Q2. True g is related to the distance from the center of the Earth. As the altitude changes, g changes.

### Terms to Know

- natural frequency, resonance, wave, wavelength, frequency, transverse, longitudinal, constructive interference, destructive interference, superposition, standing wave, beats, intensity, power

**/LO/** 16.8. Forced Oscillations and Resonance

- Understand resonance of a paddle ball on a string.

**/LO/** 16.9. Waves

- State the characteristics of a wave.
- Calculate the velocity of wave propagation.

**/LO/** 16.10. Superposition and Interference

- Explain standing waves.
- Describe the mathematical representation of harmonics
- . Understand the combination of two waves that have similar frequencies (beats)

**/LO/** 16.11. Energy in Waves: Intensity

- Understand the relationship of power and intensity, and intensity and amplitude.

## 16.8 Forced Oscillations and Resonance

### To Do

### Notes

What is the natural frequency of a system?

Q1. TRUE or FALSE It is possible for a small force to create a large amplitude for harmonic motion.

The natural frequency is equal to 1/ (natural period) or f

# o

 = ( 1/(2π) ) sqrt(k/m)

Resonance exists if the frequency of the driving force is equal to the natural frequency of the system. Name some situations in which resonance is desired and some in which it is destructive.

If I remember we may watch a video on YouTube … Tacoma Narrows Bridge Collapse

## 16.9 Waves

### To Do

### Notes

A pulse is a single, localized disturbance that travels in a medium. A periodic wave is a repeated propagation of a disturbance through a medium without any net displacement of the medium. Note that light does not require a medium in order for the light wave to move between two locations.

Write down three examples of a wave.

Usually there is no net motion of the medium in the direction the wave is traveling. e.g. In the open ocean, a bottle with a message in it does not move in the direction of the waves due to the motion of the waves. The bottle will move in the direction of any ocean current and will possibly be pushed by surface winds. But, the wave does not carry the bottle along with the wave.

Write out a definition for wavelength (λ.) .

For all waves, V

# wave

 = fλ Wave velocity = frequency \* wavelength.

Write out a definition for the amplitude of a wave.

The amplitude does not affect the speed of the wave.

Transverse and Longitudinal Waves

For a longitudinal wave the medium oscillates parallel to the wave velocity direction. For a transverse wave the medium oscillates perpendicular to the wave velocity direction.

List two transverse waves:

List two longitudinal waves:

Q2. TRUE or FALSE Each particle of a water wave merely oscillates up and down about an equilibrium point.

## 16.10 Superposition and Interference

### To Do

### Notes

The principle of superposition: If two waves occupy the same space at the same time then the net displacement of the medium is the sum of the individual wave displacements. (This assumes that the medium does not exceed its elastic limit and become permanently deformed.)

If both waves have the same sign of displacement then the net displacement will be larger than each individual displacement. This situation is called constructive interference. The two waves are said to be &quot;in phase.&quot;

If the displacements have opposite signs then the net displacement will be smaller than the magnitude of the largest displacement. This situation is called destructive interference. The two waves are said to be &quot;out of phase.&quot;

Standing Waves

If two interfering waves have the same wavelengths and amplitudes and opposite directions of travel a standing wave is produced. There will be locations (nodes) at which the displacement of the medium is always zero. The distance between adjacent nodes is ½ wavelength. Between the nodes are antinodes. The medium has its maximum vibration at the antinodes. There is ¼ wavelength between a node and antinode.

The lowest frequency of a standing wave is called the fundamental frequency. For a string anchored at both ends the fundamental frequency is

```
                                                            f
```

# 1

 = V / (2L)

The harmonic frequencies are integer multiples of the fundamental frequency. f

# n

 = n \* f

# 1

The speed of a transverse wave on a string is given by V = sqrt( F

# T

 / (m/L) ) F

# T

is the tension in the string. m/L is the number of kilograms per meter for the string.

Beats

When two waves that have different frequencies superimpose you can observe the formation of beats. There will be a time when the two waves are in phase and the amplitude of the combined wave is large. There will be a time when the two waves are out of phase and the amplitude will be zero.

The beat frequency is found by subtracting the two frequencies. If the two waves are generated by two tuning forks, the beat frequency will be frequency you hear for the warbling sound.

_f_

# B

 = ∣_f_1 − _f_2 ∣

Explain the physics principle that is used to get all of the instruments in a band or orchestra &quot;in tune.&quot;

## 16.11 Energy in Waves: Intensity

### To Do

### Notes

The energy transmitted by a wave is proportional to the square of the frequency and the square of the amplitude of the wave.

The intensity of a wave is a measure of the amount of power transmitted through a unit of area.

I = P/A e.g. watts/m

# 2

The intensity of sunlight at the top of the earth&#39;s atmosphere is 1,370 watts/m

# 2

 .

Q3. What minimum area of a solar collector is needed if the solar collector is to be the sole power source for a 100 watt light bulb?

------

Answers: Try to answer the questions on your own first.

Q1. True A person pushing someone in a swing only needs to supply a small push for each swing if the push is done at the correct time. The correct time is when the person on the swing is moving away from the person who is pushing.

Q2. False The water molecules move back and forth as well as up and down.

Q3. 1370 watts/m

# 2

 \* Area = 100 Watts Area = 0.073 m

# 2

 or 730 cm

# 2

 This is a square that is 27 cm long on each side.

### Copyright

Copyright© 2015 by Greg Clements. Permission is granted to reproduce this document as long as \(1\) this Copyright notice is included, \(2\) no charge of any kind is made, and \(3\) the use is for an educational purpose. Editing of the document to suit your own class style and purposes is allowed.

# 